HIN2Vec: Explore Meta-paths in Heterogeneous Information
Networks for Representation Learning
Tao-yang Fu
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802, USA
txf225@cse.psu.edu
Wang-Chien Lee
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802, USA
wlee@cse.psu.edu
Zhen Lei
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802, USA
zlei@psu.edu
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we propose a novel representation learning frame-
work, namely HIN2Vec, for heterogeneous information networks
(HINs). The core of the proposed framework is a neural network
model, also called HIN2Vec, designed to capture the rich seman-
tics embedded in HINs by exploiting different types of relation-
ships among nodes. Given a set of relationships specified in forms
of meta-paths in an HIN, HIN2Vec carries out multiple prediction
training tasks jointly based on a target set of relationships to learn
latent vectors of nodes and meta-paths in the HIN. In addition to
model design, several issues unique to HIN2Vec, including regular-
ization of meta-path vectors, node type selection in negative sam-
pling, and cycles in random walks, are examined. To validate our
ideas, we learn latent vectors of nodes using four large-scale real
HIN datasets, including Blogcatalog, Yelp, DBLP and U.S. Patents,
and use them as features for multi-label node classification and
link prediction applications on those networks. Empirical results
show that HIN2Vec soundly outperforms the state-of-the-art repre-
sentation learning models for network data, including DeepWalk,
LINE, node2vec, PTE, HINE and ESim, by 6.6% to 23.8% ofmicro-f1
in multi-label node classification and 5% to 70.8% of MAP in link
prediction.
KEYWORDS
representation learning, heterogeneous information network
1
INTRODUCTION
Network data analysis and mining is an important research field
because network data, capturing phenomena in various networks,
such as social networks, paper citation networks, and World Wide
Web, are ubiquitous in the real world [6, 15, 29]. Network analy-
sis often involves prediction tasks over nodes or edges, e.g., node
classification [14], node clustering [23] and link prediction [20]. In
order to achieve good performance in these tasks, a proper repre-
sentation of network nodes and edges that captures embedded in-
formation in the network structure while preserving the original
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy other-
wise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CIKM’17, November 6–10, 2017, Singapore.
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4918-5/17/11…$15.00
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3132847.3132953
relationships amongst nodes is much needed to serve as input fea-
tures to supervised machine learning algorithms. This is a prepro-
cessing step for data mining and knowledge discovery, well known
as feature engineering. A typical approach of feature engineering is
to involve domain experts to manually design domain-specific rep-
resentation of data, i.e., feature vectors of data, for specific predic-
tion tasks. This approach, heavily relying on prior knowledge and
experiences of domain experts, is time-consuming and expensive.
This issue has given rise to a great deal of interest in representation
learning in networks that aims to embed a network into a low-
dimensional space and represent each node as a low-dimensional
feature vector for supervised learning.
In this paper, we propose a new neural network (NN) model,
namely Heterogeneous Information Network to Vector (HIN2Vec) for
representation learning of nodes in heterogeneous information net-
works (HINs). The HIN2Vec model aims to capture the rich in-
formation in an HIN by exploiting various types of relationships
among nodes and the network structure. HINs, such as Yelp social
network [4], DBLP collaboratoin network [3], and U.S. patent ci-
tation network [2], are networks with nodes and edges belonging
to different types. With heterogeneous types of nodes and edges,
HINs are able to describe various types of relationships among
nodes and thus contain very rich information. A meta-path, con-
sisted of a sequence of node types and/or edge types, is usually
used to denote a particular relationship between node pairs. There-
fore, different meta-paths may have different semantics. For ex-
ample, consider a DBLP collaboration network, which consists of
three node types: Author, Paper and Venue, and two edge types:
an author writes a paper, and a paper is published in a venue. A
meta-path Author-Paper-Author describes the collaboration be-
tween two authors, while Author-Paper-Venue-Paper-Author
describes the relationship where both authors have papers pub-
lished in the same conference venue. We claim that encoding the
rich information embedded in meta-paths and the whole network
structure would help learning meaningful representation which is
useful for various applications, because the different semantics of
relationships are better captured.
To achieve this goal and to train the HIN2Vec model, we design a
new learning framework (also called HIN2Vec) (shown in Figure 1)
which, given an HIN and a set of targeted relationships specified
in forms of meta-paths, learns latent vectors of both nodes and the
targeted relationships in the HIN by predicting relationships be-
tween nodes. Compared with previous works, the HIN2Vec model
preserves more contextual information, not only assuming that
two nodes are relevant if there exists a relationship between them
Session 9B: Representation Learning
CIKM’17, November 6-10, 2017, Singapore
1797
Figure 1: Overview of the HIN2Vec framework
(as previous works do) but also distinguishing the different rela-
tionships between nodes and treating them differently by learn-
ing relationship vectors jointly. In specific, the HIN2Vec frame-
work consists of two phases: (1) Training data preparation: A data
preparation approach based on random walk and negative sampling
is developed to prepare training data in accordance with the tar-
geted relationships for representation learning of nodes in HINs;
and (2) Representation learning: The novel neural network model,
HIN2Vec model, is designed to learn both node vectors and re-
lationship vectors by maximizing the likelihood of predicting re-
lationships among nodes jointly. The proposed neural network
model is trained by predicting multiple heterogeneous relationships
between node pairs simultaneously and jointly. This multi-task
learning approach allows the proposed model to jointly embed the
rich information of different relationships and the overall network
structure into node vectors. Conceptually, relevant nodes which
have relationships are close to each other. On the other hand, the
relationship vectors indicate which dimension captures certain re-
lationships, and are useful for providing analytical insights, such
as grouping meta-paths with similar semantics. Furthermore, it
is essential for the proposed model to be scalable for large-scale
real-world datasets. We leverage asynchronous stochastic gradi-
ent descent in representation learning in parallel.
There are a few previous works on representation learning in
homogeneous information networks [10, 24, 28]. Although these
prior works all claim that their approaches are able to capture the
structural information of networks, the specific objective functions
used in their models tend to consider only part of aggregated in-
formation among nodes or limited types of relationships between
nodes separately. There are also several existing works on rep-
resentation learning in HINs [8, 11, 13, 25, 27]. However, some
models aim to only capture limited types of relationships between
nodes (e.g., one-hop or two-hop neighberhood between two nodes)
[8, 11, 27], and some tend to miss the different semantics of rela-
tionships between nodes and only capture the aggregated informa-
tion of relationships [8, 11, 13, 27]. Only one study [25] tries to cap-
ture different relationships between nodes. However, it highly de-
pends on a user-guided way to determine a user-given meta-path
set and the weight of each meta-path for representation learning.
Moreover, some parts of its objective function to encode relation-
ships between nodes, e.g., the multiplication of vectors of meta-
paths, are illy defined.
The major contributions of our work are summarized as follows.
A novel idea for representation learning in HINs. With mul-
tiple types of nodes and edges, HINs are able to describe various
types of relationships between nodes, which have different seman-
tics. We show that by capturing various types of relationships be-
tween nodes would help representation learning because it better
captures more detailed and precise information embedded in the
network structure.
A new representation learning framework for HINs. We pro-
pose a two-phase framework to learn representations of nodes and
meta-paths in HINs. The training data preparation algorithm in
Phase 1 adopts random walk generation and negative sampling
to prepare training data tailored for HIN2Vec. The HIN2Vec NN
model, core of phase 2, is designed as a logistic binary classifier
that predicts whether two input nodes has a specific relationship
in order to efficiently learn model parameters, i.e., node vectors
and meta-path vectors. Issues in these two phases, such as cycles
in random walks, node selection in negative sampling, and regu-
larization of meta-path vectors are studied.
Empirical study using real-world data. We evaluate HIN2Vec
by conducting a comprehensive evaluation with two different ap-
plications, node classification and link prediction, using four large-
scale real HIN datasets, including Blogcatalog, Yelp, DBLP and
U.S. patents, in comparison with six state-of-the-art representation
learning models. Empirical result shows that HIN2Vec soundly
outperforms all existing models. In addition, an analysis on the
learned meta-path vectors shows that the learned representation
of relationships capture their semantics.
In the rest of this paper, we first review the related work in
Section 2, and introduce HINs, meta-paths, problem definition and
analysis in Section 3. We present the proposed HIN2Vec frame-
work in Section 4 and show experiment results in Section 5. Fi-
nally, we conclude the paper in Section 6.
2
RELATED WORK
Recent development on representation learning has shed a light
on alleviating the dependence of feature engineering on human
knowledge and labors [7, 24, 28]. The goal of representation learn-
ing aims to automatically learn useful latent representations of
data that are effective and discriminative as input features to su-
pervised machine learning algorithms for various prediction tasks.
Among the various approaches of representation learning, the neu-
ral network based learning models have received significant at-
tention in recent years, and achieved successes in several empir-
ical research studies of various domains, including speech recog-
nition [12, 22], computer vision [9, 16], and natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) [21].
Recently, research on representation learning has been extended
to network data [8, 10, 11, 13, 24, 25, 27, 28]. However, instead of
the complex Heterogeneous information networks (HINs) targeted
in this paper, some prior works focus only on learning node vec-
tors in homogeneous information networks [10, 24, 28]. Moreover,
while they all claim that their approaches are able to capture the
embedded structures of information networks, these models tend
to consider only aggregated information among nodes or limited
types of relationships. For instance, DeepWalk [24] and node2vec
Session 9B: Representation Learning
CIKM’17, November 6-10, 2017, Singapore
1798
[10] learn feature vectors of nodes by capturing the nearby neigh-
borhood to each node by simulating uniform and parameterized
random walks, respectively. LINE [28] captures 1-hop and 2-hop
neighborhood relationships, separately, to learn two representa-
tions of nodes.
There are also several existing works on representation learn-
ing on HINs [8, 11, 13, 25, 27]. Some models aim to only capture
limited types of relationships between nodes.
Specifically, PTE
[27] and HNE [8] learn feature vectors of nodes by capturing 1-
hop neighborhood relationships between nodes. HEBE [11] cap-
tures 2-hop neighberhood between multiple nodes. Some tend to
miss the different semantics of relationships between nodes and
only capture the aggregated information of relationships [8, 11, 13,
27]. Only one study [25] tries to capture different relationships be-
tween nodes. However, it relies heavily on user guidance to deter-
mine a user-given meta-path set and the weight of each meta-path
for representation learning. Moreover, some parts of its objective
function to encode relationships between nodes, e.g., the multipli-
cation of vectors of meta-paths, are illy defined.
3
PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we first introduce the notions of HINs and meta-
paths, then define the tackled problem, and discuss the challenges.
3.1
Information Network and Meta-Path
We first define information networks and meta-paths.
Definition 1. Information Network. An information network
is a directed graph G = (V ,E,Φ,Ψ), where V is the set of nodes;
E ⊆V × V is the set of edges in V . Φ : V →A and Ψ : E →R
are type mapping functions for nodes and edges, respectively. Here
each node v ∈V is mapped to one particular node type in A, i.e.,
Φ(v) ∈A, and each link e ∈E belongs to a particular edge type in
R, i.e., Ψ(e) ∈R. When |A| > 1 or |R| > 1, the network is called a
heterogeneous information network (HIN); otherwise, it is a homoge-
neous information network.
The concept of meta-paths has been proposed to describe how
nodes are related to each other [18] [26]. In the following, we de-
fine meta-paths.
Definition 2. Meta-path. Given a heterogeneous information
network G = (V ,E,Φ,Ψ), a meta-path π is a sequence of node types
a1,a2,...,an and/or edge types r1,r2,...,rn−1:
π = a1
r1→...ai
ri→...
rn−1
→an
A path p, which goes though nodes v1,v2,...,vn, is an instance
of the meta-path π, if∀i = 1,...,n,ai = Φ(vi) andri = Ψ(vi,vi+1).
3.2
Problem Definition and Analysis
The goal of this work is to learn a representation of nodes in an
HIN. In the following, we formally define the problem.
Definition 3. Representation Learning on HIN. Given a heteroge-
neous information network (HIN), denoted as a graphG = (V ,E,Φ,Ψ).
Representation learning aims to learn a function f : V →Rd that
projects each node v ∈V to a vector in a d-dimensional space Rd,
where d ≪|V |.
Figure 2:
A conceptual
model for HIN2Vec
Figure 3:
A paper-author
HIN
In this paper, we propose a neural network model to tackle the
representation learning problem on HIN. Our idea is to explore the
rich information and network structure in HIN by capturing mul-
tiple relationships (i.e., meta-paths) between nodes and use them
as prediction objectives simultaneously and jointly for learning of
the node vectors. To realize this idea, nevertheless, we face the
following challenges: (1) Model design. A well designed NN model
is critical to effective and efficient learning of the HIN2Vec frame-
work. A conceptual neural network model, developed in our pre-
liminary design, trains a multi-label classifier to learn node vec-
tors, but it faces excessive overhead in both training data prepara-
tion and model learning processes. The proposed HIN2Vec model
is a better design. (2) Regularization. Due to the semantics and
implications of latent vectors in the learning process, proper regu-
larization on certain model parameters are required. (3) Training
data preparation. Training data need to be prepared and tailored
based on the learning logic behind the proposed HIN2Vec model.
There is a trade-off, especially for large-scale HINs, between the
computational/spacial efficiency and the quality of training data.
4
THE HIN2VEC FRAMEWORK
As introduced earlier, the HIN2Vec framework consists of two
phases: Training data preparation and Representation learning (See
Figure 1). In the following, we first present our approach for the
representation learning phase (Section 4.1), where we discuss a
conceptual design of NN model for our framework and its pitfalls,
and then introduce the proposed HIN2Vec NN model and some
issues to consider. Next, for the training data sampling phase, we
propose an efficient training data sampling method, based on ideas
of random walks and negative sampling, to generate training data
for the proposed model and discuss related issues (Section 4.2).
4.1
Representation Learning
As discussed, our idea to learn node vectors for HIN applications
lies in jointly learning a model for multiple prediction tasks, one
for each meta-path. Thus, an intuitive approach is to develop an
NN model that predicts a set of targeted relationships between any
given pair of nodes.
Conceptually, we can adopt a single-hidden-layer feedforward
neural network model (as illustrated in Figure 2) that takes a pair of
nodesx,y ∈V as the input to predict the probabilities P(ri |x,y)(i =
1..|R|) of relationships between x and y in the target relationship
set R as the output. In the model, the input layer takes in two one-
hot vectors, ⃗x and ⃗y both of length |V |, representing x and y. In
the latent layer, ⃗x and ⃗y are transformed into latent vectors W ′
X ⃗x
andW ′
Y ⃗y, whereWX andWY are two |V | ×d matrices representing
the transformation, W ′
X and W ′
Y are their transpose matrices, and
d is the dimensionality of the hidden layer. Finally, in the output
Session 9B: Representation Learning
CIKM’17, November 6-10, 2017, Singapore
1799
Figure 4: The HIN2Vec NN model
layer, the model outputs a vector of length |R| that predicts the
probability of each relationship r ∈R between x and y, where WR
is a |R| ×d matrix representing the transformation from the latent
layer to output. In summary, this conceptual model can be seen
as a multi-label classifier, and the three matrices,WX ,WY andWR,
collect the feature vectors of input node pairs and their relation-
ships.1
To illustrate the conceptual NN model and issues arising in the
HIN2Vec framework, Figure 3 shows a simple HIN consisting of
four papers (P) P1 … P4, and two authors (A) A1 and A2. In this
example, an edge between two papers denotes their citation rela-
tionship (we ignore the direction of citations for simplicity) and an
edge between a paper and an author denotes the authorship. Let
R denote a target relationship set that includes all relationships be-
tween nodes within 2 hops, i.e., R = {P-P, P-A, A-P, P-P-P, P-
P-A, P-A-P, A-P-P, A-P-A}, specified by meta-paths. To train
the conceptual model based on our idea of HIN2Vec, training data
need to be prepared for eight prediction tasks corresponding to R.
For instance, P1 and A1 have two relationships, P-A and P-P-A. A
training data entry is ⟨x : P1,y : A1,output : [0,1,0,0,1,0,0,0]⟩.
In practice, however, an issue arising in preparing the training
set for this model is the high cost in scanning the whole network
to find all the relationships in R for each pair of nodes in the net-
work. In addition, during the training process, the transformation
matrices, i.e., WX , WY and WR, need to be updated in accordance
with all the relationships, whether they are in presence (positive)
between two input nodes or not (negative).
4.1.1
The HIN2Vec model. To address the aforementioned is-
sues, we propose the HIN2Vec NN model that reduces the predic-
tion tasks of the conceptual NN model (i.e., predicting the probabil-
ities of relationships between two nodes) into new prediction tasks
— whether two nodes, x and y, have a specific relationship r. As to
be discussed later, this design avoids scanning for all relationships
in data preparation as well as examining/updating for all relation-
ships during training.
As shown in Figure 4, the HIN2Vec model is a binary classi-
fier that takes a pair of nodes x and y, and a certain relationship
r ∈R as the input to predict whether the relationship r exists be-
tween x and y. The input layer takes in three one-hot vectors, ⃗x, ⃗y,
and ⃗r, which are transformed into latent vectors W ′
X ⃗x, W ′
Y ⃗y, and
f01(W ′
R⃗r) in the latent layer. Note that the treatment on r is differ-
ent from x and y due to their different semantics and implications
1As a conceptual model, here we do not discuss some implementation details such as
aggregation and activation operations in detail.
in the learning process. Here we apply a regularization function
f01(.) to restrict the values of latent vector for r to be between 0
and 1. We apply Hadamard function, i.e., element-wise multipli-
cation, to aggregate the three vectors, denoted by W ′
X ⃗x ⊙W ′
Y ⃗y ⊙
f01(W ′
R⃗r) and then apply the Identity function for activation. Fi-
nally, the output layer, taking Summation as the input function
and Sigmoid function for activation, computes siдmoid
(∑W ′
X ⃗x
⊙W ′
Y ⃗y ⊙f01(W ′
R⃗r) to realize logistic classification. Notice that, in
the framework, we can regularize WX and WY to be the same ma-
trix or two different matrices, depending on whether we would like
to emphasize on the individual roles of input nodes in the relation-
ships. In our experiments, we makeWX andWY to be identical, so
WX andWR consist of learned node vectors and meta-path vectors,
respectively.
4.1.2
Regularization of WR. As discussed, the regularization
function f01(.) ofWR regularizes values inWR within 0 and 1. The
goal is two-fold: 1) it avoids negative values in WR, which would
inverse the sign in the multiplication of node vectors, thus interfer-
ing the learning of node vectors. Suppose we do not apply f01(.)
on WR, and some values in a relationship vector are negative. The
signs of corresponding values in the two node vectors may become
opposite to optimize W ′
R(W ′
X ⃗x ⊙W ′
Y ⃗y) in the model. However, if
these nodes are actually positively related, the signs of values in
these two nodes vectors should be the same so as to stay positive
after passing through the Sigmoid function at the output layer. 2)
it prevents values inWR from becoming too large, which decreases
the effectiveness of learning. In specific, because HIN2Vec adopts
element-wise multiplication to aggregate the three vectors W ′
X ⃗x,
W ′
Y ⃗y, andW ′
R⃗r. If a value ofW ′
R⃗r is greater than 1, it decreases the
importance of values of W ′
X ⃗x and W ′
Y ⃗y in the multiplication, thus
interfering the learning of node vectors.
Several functions, e.g., Sigmoid function or Binary Step func-
tion, may serve the purpose described above. We empirically show
that the Binary Step function outperforms Sigmoid.
4.1.3
Optimization Objective. The learning of HIN2Vec model
parameters (i.e., node vectors and meta-path vectors) is realized by
setting multiple optimization objectives, one for each meta-path in
R, to facilitate iterative training upon the training data. It is critical
to set the objective functions properly.
To train HIN2Vec, a training set D containing training data in
the form of ⟨x,y,r,L(x,y,r)⟩is extracted from the HIN. Here
L(x,y,r), a binary value, indicates whether x and y have r. With
D, HIN2Vec is trained by the backpropagation training algorithm
in conjunction with stochastic gradient descent. It goes backwards
to adjust the weights in WX ,WY , and WR for each entry in D, at-
tempting to maximize the objective function O, which is the multi-
plication of Ox,y,r (x,y,r) for each training data entry in D, where
Ox,y,r (x,y,r) quantifies how HIN2Vec correctly predicts L(x,y,r).
To ease the computation in the optimization process, we maximize
logO rather than directly maximize O. The objective function O
and derivation of logO are shown below.
O ∝logO = ∑
x,y,r ∈D logOx,y,r (x,y,r)
In the above, Ox,y,r (x,y,r) quantifies how HIN2Vec correctly
predicts a training data ⟨x,y,r,L(x,y,r)⟩based on P(r|x,y), which
is the output of HIN2Vec and is the predicted probability that x and
Session 9B: Representation Learning
CIKM’17, November 6-10, 2017, Singapore
1800
y have the relationship r in the network. Specifically, for a train-
ing data entry ⟨x,y,r,L(x,y,r)⟩, when L(x,y,r) is 1, Ox,y,r (x,y,r)
aims to maximize P(r|x,y); otherwise, Ox,y,r (x,y,r) aims to mini-
mize P(r|x,y). Thus, Ox,y,r (x,y,r), logOx,y,r (x,y,r) and P(r |x,y)
are derived as below,
Ox,y,r (x,y,r) =

P(r |x,y),
if L(x,y,r) = 1
1 −P(r|x,y),
if L(x,y,r) = 0
logOx,y,r (x,y,r) =L(x,y,r) log P(r |x,y)
+ [1 −L(x,y,r)] log[1 −P(r|x,y)]
P(r |x,y) = siдmoid
(∑W ′
X ⃗x ⊙W ′
Y ⃗y ⊙f01(W ′
R⃗r)
)
We then apply the stochastic gradient descent algorithm to max-
imize the objective function O. Specifically, for each training data
entry, ⟨x,y,r,L(x,y,r)⟩, it goes backwards to adjust the weights
inW ′
X ⃗x,W ′
Y ⃗y, andW ′
R⃗r based on the gradients of logOx,y,r (x,y,r)
differentiated by W ′
X ⃗x,W ′
Y ⃗y, and W ′
R⃗r, respectively, by
W ′
X ⃗x := W ′
X ⃗x + d logOx,y,r (x,y,r)
dW ′
X ⃗x
W ′
Y ⃗y := W ′
Y ⃗y + d logOx,y,r (x,y,r)
dW ′
Y ⃗y
W ′
R⃗r := W ′
R⃗r + d logOx,y,r (x,y,r)
dW ′
R⃗r
4.2
Training Data Preparation
We develop an efficient algorithm to sample the HIN while extract-
ing training data for HIN2Vec in the form of ⟨x,y,r,L(x,y,r)⟩. No-
tice that there is a trade-off in data collection between the compu-
tational efficiency (e.g., to sample training data randomly instead
of enumerating) and the quality (e.g., the training dataset should
cover as many nodes pairs with correct semantics in their relation-
ships as possible). Therefore, it’s essential to design an efficient
data sample extraction scheme for training data preparation.
We apply random walks in the task for several advantages. First,
it is computationally efficient for both space and time complexity.
The space complexity of storing the direct neighbors of a node to
select the next node in a random walk isO(|V |), and the space com-
plexity of storing the path of a random walk with length l is O(l).
The time complexity of selecting the next node is O(1) (by some
random selection methods, such as Alias method [5, 17]), and the
time complexity of generating a path with length l by a random
walk is O(l). Moreover, subsequences of a random walk are also
random walks, which can be used to generate training data with-
out re-generating new random walks. Suppose we consider all re-
lationships within w-hop neighborhood. Given a random walk of
length l > w, it can generate w training data for l −w nodes. Thus,
the time complexity of generating training data given a random
walk is O(w(l −w)). Therefore, if we consider 1 to w-hop neighbor
relationships, the space complexity and time complexity of gener-
ating training data by a random walk with length l is O(|V | + l)
and O(l + w(l −w)), respectively. When l and w are both much
smaller than |V |, using random walks to generate training data is
scalable for large-scale networks.
Consider the example of paper-author network discussed ear-
lier. Suppose we generate a random walk P1,P2,A1,P3,A1. Let
the target relationship set R include all relationships with meta-
path length no greater than 2-hop. We can generate training data
Table 1: Statistics of Datasets
Blogcatalog
User
Group
10312
39
Yelp
User
Business
City
Category
630639
86810
10
807
DBLP
Paper
Author
Venue
53464
54949
20
U.S. Patents
Patent
Inventor
Assignee
Class
295145
293848
31805
14
for the first node P1 as ⟨P1,P2,P-P⟩and ⟨P1,A1,P-P-A⟩, for the
second node P2 as ⟨P2,A1,P-A⟩and ⟨P2,A3,P-A-P⟩, and so on.
There are issues in applying random walks to HIN2Vec data
preparation. First, a random walk may give rise to cycles, which
hurt the quality of the training data, because a path instance with
cycles may not comply to the semantics of the corresponding meta-
path. For example, the third node A1 in the above random walk
generates a training data entry ⟨A1,A1,A-P-A⟩by the path
A1,P3,A1. However, an author has no coauthorship with herself.
Thus, we eliminate data entries with any cycle by checking dupli-
cate nodes.
Second, random walks are used to sample positive data, but the
model also needs negative data for learning. Thus, while generat-
ing positive samples via random walks, we also generate negative
data entries following the ideas of negative sampling in Word2Vec
[21]. For each sampled positive entry, ⟨x,y,r⟩, we generate neg-
ative data entries by randomly replacing one of the three values
with other x ′, y′, or r ′, where x ′ and y′ are randomly selected
nodes, and r ′ is a randomly selected relationship from R. A gen-
erated negative data entry, ⟨x ′′,y′′,r ′′⟩indicates that x ′′ and y′′
are not expected to have a certain relationship r ′′. However, for
HIN2Vec, more erroneous negative data (which actually a positve
data) might be generated by replacement of r compared with by re-
placement of x or y since |V | is usually much larger than |R|, while
|R| is usually not very large (tens to hundreds). To maintain effi-
ciency and the cleanness of the negative samples, we only sample
negative data by randomly replacing x or y, and filter out erro-
neously generated positive samples. To do so, we also ensure that
the randomly selected x ′ or y′ has the same node type as x or y.
For example, for a positive data ⟨P1,P2,P-P⟩, we randomly select
a paper, says P3, to replace P2 (or P1) to generate a negative data
that indicates P2 (or P1) does not have a citation relationship with
P3. In other words, we do not select a node with a different node
type, says authors, for replacement. We empirically examine the
effect of avoiding cycles in random walks and ensuring the same
node type in negative sampling.
5
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation on HIN2Vec.
We first introduce four real-world HINs used for experiments and
six models for representation learning on networks. Then, we eval-
uate HIN2Vec and those models by two applications: multi-label
classification for nodes and link prediction for edges.
Session 9B: Representation Learning
CIKM’17, November 6-10, 2017, Singapore
1801
5.1
Datasets and Models for Evaluation
Our evaluation involves two social network datasets (Blogcatalog
and Yelp) and two scientific publication datasets (DBLP and U.S.
Patents). Some statistics of the HINs extracted from these datasets
are summarized in Table 1.
Blogcatalog is a blog dataset of Blogcatalog, released by Arizona
State University [1]. We use all bloggers (U) and their groups (G)
as nodes to form a social network, which contains friendships (U-
U) and users’ groups (U-G) as edges.
Yelp is a social media dataset, released in Yelp Dataset Challenge
[4]. We extract data of the top 10 cities with the most businesses to
form a network, which includes users (U), businesses (B), cities(C)
and categories (T) as nodes, and friendships (U-U), users’ reviews
(B-U), businesses’ cities (B-L) and businesses’ categories (B-C) as
edges. We filter small categories with less than 10 businesses.
DBLP is a bibliographic dataset in computer science [3]. We ex-
tract papers published between 1994 to 2014 of 20 conferences in 4
research fields to form a network 2. The network includes papers
(P), authors (A) and venues (V) as nodes, and authorships (P-A),
papers’ venues (P-V) as edges.
U.S. Patent is a patent dataset of United States Patent and Trade-
mark Office (USPTO) [2]. We extract patents issued between 1998
to 2012 in 14 drug related patent classes to form a network 3. The
network contains patents (P), inventors (I), assignees (A) and patent
classes (C) as nodes, and inventorships (P-I), patents’ assignees (P-
A), patents’ classes (P-C) and citations (P→P) as edges.
We evaluate HIN2Vec against six state-of-the-art representation
learning models. Among them, DeepWalk, LINE and node2vec, are
designed for homogeneous information networks. The are applied
by treating all node and edges in the HINs as homogeneous ones.
DeepWalk [24] learns d-dimensional node vectors by capturing
node pairs within w-hop neighborhood via uniform random walks
in the network.
LINE [28] learns node vectors by considering first- and second-
order proximities of nodes in a network separately. We apply LINE
to learn d/2 dimensions by capturing first-order information, and
the other d/2 dimensions by capturing the second-order informa-
tion, and then use both to form d-dimensional node vectors.
node2vec [10] is generalized from DeepWalk. It learns d-
dimensional node vectors by capturing node pairs within w-hop
neighborhood via parameterized random walks.
PTE [27] decomposes an HIN to a set of bipartite networks by
edge tyes, and learns d-dimensional node vectors by capturing 1-
hop neighborhood of the resulting bipartite networks.
HINE [13] learns d-dimensional node vectors by capturing path
counts or path constrained random walks [19] of node pairs within
w-hop neighborhood.
ESim [25] learns d-dimensional node vectors by paths between
nodes along a given set of meta-paths. This model also learns meta-
path vectors, which is used to shift node vectors in the designed
objective function.
220 conferences are ”AAAI”, ”CVPR”, ”ECML”, ”IJCAI”, ”SIGMOD”, ”VLDB”, ”PODS”,
”EDBT”, ”ICDE”, ”ICDM”, ”KDD”, ”PAKDD”, ”PKDD”, ”SDM”, ”ECIR”, ”SIGIR”,
”WSDM”, ”WWW”, ”CIKM”, that belong to 4 research fields, including DM, DB, IR,
and ML.
3Drug related patent classes are 128, 351, 433, 424, 435, 623, 514, 600, 601, 602, 604,
606, 607, 800.
5.2
Multi-label Classification of Nodes
In this section, we evaluate the models by multi-label classification
of nodes. We first introduce the experimental setup, including the
process of classification, the preparation of labeled datasets and
the default settings of parameters in the compared models. Then,
we perform sensitivity tests on parameters of HIN2Vec to deter-
mine their default settings. Next, we examine several issues in the
HIN2Vec framework, including the regularization on meta-path
vectors WR, cycles in random walks, and negative sampling with
the same node type. Finally, we show the experimental results and
analyze the meta-path vectors learned by HIN2Vec.
5.2.1
Experimental Setup. After learning the node vectors, we
select a set of nodes, which are assigned one or more labels from
a finite label set, and use their representations as feature vectors
to learn and test a linear SVM classifier with five-fold cross vali-
dation. We use micro-f1 score and macro-f1 score as metrics for
evaluation.
In Blogcatalog, users are categorized by 39 groups, which serve
as labels. Thus, all users are included in the labeled dataset for
user group classification. In Yelp, as the majority of businesses are
restaurants, we select 10 main cuisines in restaurants’ categories
as labels, and select 13,111 restaurants with at least one of those
labels to form a labeled dataset for restaurant type classification 4.
In DBLP, we use the 4 research fields as labels, and assign an au-
thor with a field if he/she has a publication in a conference in that
field to form a labeled dataset for author classification. Finally, for
U.S. Patents, we use 14 drug related patent classes as labels, and in-
volve all patents to form a labeled dataset for patent classification.
For these node classifications, we eliminate from HINs, groups in
Blogcatalog, categories in Yelp, venues in DBLP and patent classes
in U.S. Patents, when we learn the representation of nodes.
Regarding default parameters, the dimensionality of node vec-
tors,d, is set to 128 for all approaches. The negative sampling raten
is set to 5. The initial learning rate α in stochastic gradient descent
is 0.025. The context window for DeepWalk and node2vec is set to
4 because they achieve good performance. Also, we use all meta-
paths with length w ≤4 for HINE, ESim and HIN2Vec. For ESim,
we set the weight of training data sampling of each meta-path
based on its length. For example, a meta-path with lengthl, its sam-
pling weight is 1/l. We also try equal weighting of each meta-path,
but weighting by meta-path length performs better. For node2vec,
the two parameters q and p for parameterized random walks are
set to 4 and 1, respectively. The number of training data sampling
or the length of random walks for generating training data varies
for each model and for each dataset, in order to obtain converged
results.
5.2.2
Parameter Tuning in HIN2Vec. Parameters settings in
HIN2Vec affect the node representation learning and the applica-
tion performance. To decide the default settings, we vary the val-
ues of important parameters to observe how the micro-f1 changes
in node classification in the networks. The results are shown in
Figure 5.
410 main cuisines are ”American”, ”Mexican”, ”Italian”, ”Chinese”, ”Japanese”, ”Thai”,
”Indian”, ”Canadian”, ”Middle Eastern” and ”Greek”
Session 9B: Representation Learning
CIKM’17, November 6-10, 2017, Singapore
1802
(a) Dimensionality d
(b) Number of Negative Samples n
(c) Length of Random Walks l
(d) Length of Meta-paths w
Figure 5: Parameter Tuning
No. of dimensionality. First of all, Figure 5(a) shows that set-
ting the number of dimension d at 128 is reasonable.
General
speaking, a small d is not sufficient to capture the information em-
bedded in relationships between nodes, but a large d may lead to
noises and cause overfitting. In Blogcatalog, the best performance
is achieved when d is 128. In the other three networks, increasing
d up to 256 continuously improves the performance, though their
improvements are small (about 0.7% to 6.2%). Generally, a larger
network may need a larger d to capture the information embedded
in relationships between nodes.
No. of negative samples per positive sample. As shown in Fig-
ure 5(b), the performance does not change much when the number
of negative sampling per positive sample n is set at between 3 to 7.
Thus, setting n to 5 is a good choice.
Length of Random Walks. A longer random walk can generates
more sample data. Figure 5(c) suggests that when the length of
random walks l is increased (resulting in more sample data), the
performance continues to improve and converge when l is set to
1280 or 2560.
Length of Meta-Paths. Finally, we study the impact of the maxi-
mum lengthw of meta-paths of interest. Figure 5(d) shows that the
maximum length of meta-paths does not affect the performance
significantly in Blogcatalog, Yelp and U.S. Patents, because that 1-
hop and 2-hop relationships, e.g., friendships in Blogcatalog and
citations in U.S. Patents, are the most important relationship in
these networks. However, a larger w is still helpful in these net-
works, and the performance improves by 9% when w is 4. On the
other hand, capturing meta-paths with larger w is crucial in DBLP
because some longer meta-paths have important semantic mean-
ing. For examples, A-P-A-P-A (two authors have co-authorship
with the same author) in DBLP would help the classification as
these two authors are likely to be in the same research field.
Based on these results, for HIN2Vec, the dimensionality of node
representation, d, is set to 128, the negative sampling rate n is set
to 5, and to use all meta-paths with length w ≤4, because that
these parameter values can achieve good performance in the all
Figure 6: Comparison of approaches to issues in HIN2Vec
networks. Also, these parameter values are set for the fair compar-
ison with the compared models. The length of random walks in
HIN2Vec is set to 1280 to obtained converged performance.
5.2.3
Study of unique issues in HIN2Vec. As discussed previ-
ously, there are several unique issues arising due to HIN data prepa-
ration and HIN2Vec design. In this section, we examine the issues
of i) regularization functions on relationship vectors WR, ii) nega-
tive sampling with the same node types, and iii) cycle elimination
in random walks. For (i), HIN2Vec uses the Binary Step function
instead of Sigmoid; for (ii), HIN2Vec ensures negative sampling
choosing the same types of nodes as the corresponding positive
samples rather than arbitrary node types, and for (iii), HIN2Vec
eliminates cycles from random walks instead of leaving them in
the data samples. We perform experiments to compare the differ-
ent choices in these issues and justify our decisions.
Specifically, we compare 5 settings. First, the Baseline setting
adopts Sigmoid function (Sigmod), uses arbitrary node types in
negative sampling (Arbitrary Type), and has cycles in random
walks (Cycle). On the other hand, the Best setting applies Bi-
nary Step function (Binary Step), ensures the same node type in
negative sampling (Same Type), and eliminates cycles in random
walks (No Cycle). Three additional settings regarding particular
issues are tested: a) Sigmod+ Same Type + No Cycle, b) Bi-
nary Step+ Arbitrary Type + No Cycle, and c) Binary Step +
Same Type + Cycle. Figure 6 shows that the Best setting used in
HIN2Vec performs the best, outperforming the Baseline setting in
all the networks by about 3.4% to 9.2%.
Regarding the issue of regularization functions, we find that us-
ing Binary Step is better than using Sigmoid in all networks, by
about 0.5% to 7.4%. The main difference is that Sigmoid function
regularizes values to a continuous number between 0 to 1 and Bi-
nary Step function regularizes values to 0 or 1 by the threshold
0.5. When a value in a meta-path vector is regularized to a num-
ber between 0 to 1 by Sigmoid, it amplifies the importance of the
multiplication of two input node vectors, thus mis-guiding repre-
sentation learning.
The result also shows that Same Type is better than Arbitrary
Type, by a margin of about 1.6% to 5% (excluding Blogcatalog net-
work because that it only contains one node type, and thus does
not have this issue.) The result suggests that ensuring the same
node type in negative sampling is necessary.
Finally, No Cycle and Cycle do not show significant difference.
Actually, eliminating cycles in random walks does not always per-
form better than leaving cycles in training data. Perhaps this is
because the number of erroneous data is relatively small. How-
ever, our experiments show that avoiding the training data with
Session 9B: Representation Learning
CIKM’17, November 6-10, 2017, Singapore
1803
cycles improve the efficiency while maintaining the effectiveness.
Thus, HIN2Vec chooses to remove cycles from training data.
5.2.4
Evaluation of models. The performance of node classifi-
cation by all evaluated models is summarized in Table 2. HIN2Vec
outperforms all the state-of-the-art models. As shown, the im-
provement ratio (compared with the best of these existing models,
marked by ’*’) ranges from 6.4% to 23.8%. We have the following
observations from the comparison.
Exploring meta-paths of longer length is useful. Compared
with LINE and PTE, which only capture 1-hop or 2-hop neigh-
borhood of nodes, other models usually have better performance
(except ESim) because they also capture “longer” relationships be-
tween nodes.
Distinguishing different meta-paths between nodes is use-
ful. Comparing with DeepWalk, node2vec, HINE and HIN2Vec, all
of which consider relationships of nodes within w(=4)-hop neigh-
borhood, HIN2Vec further distinguishes different relationships be-
tween nodes, whereas others only capture aggregated information.
Thus, HIN2Vec is able to capture more detailed information of net-
work structure and thus can achieve higher performance in node
classification.
Appropriate model design to distinguish relationships be-
tween nodes is crucial. Comparing with ESim which also cap-
tures meta-path relationships between nodes, HIN2Vec outperforms
ESim in all four networks. We argue the superiority of HIN2Vec
is due to a better model design that precisely captures the relation-
ships between nodes.
5.2.5
Analysis of Meta-paths. In addition to node vectors,
HIN2Vec also learns meta-path vectors as a side-product. In this
section, we analyze the representations of relationships (i.e., meta-
path vectors) by clustering those vectors to examine whether meta-
paths with relevant semantics are clustered together. We use Yelp
and U.S. Patent networks as the study cases because they have
more complex schema of networks, with more meta-paths than
Blogcatalog and DBLP. We select top 20 meta-paths in these two
networks with the highest frequency when generating the train-
ing data by random walks, and then apply K-Means algorithm to
group meta-paths into 6 clusters. The results are shown in Table 3.
In Yelp, we observe that each of clusters 1 to 5 have clear and dis-
tinct semantics. Specifically, Cluster 1 groups meta-paths of friend-
ships (except 3-hop friendship). Cluster 2 groups meta-paths be-
tween two businesses via only friendships (except B-U-U-B which
is not in top 20 frequent meta-path set). Cluster 3 contains meta-
paths between business to users via multiple hops of friendships.
In Cluster 4, B-U has unique semantics that no other meta-path is
similar with it. Cluster 5 contains meta-paths with cities. Cluster
6 contains several meta-paths that do not share semantics, and due
to the lack of space, we skip to show meta-paths in Cluster 6.
Among the 20 meta-paths in the U.S. Patent network, each of
clusters 1 to 5 also shows obvious semantics. Specifically, Clus-
ters 1 contains co-citing and co-cited meta-paths, which are rele-
vant because two patents are likely in the same research field if
they are co-cited or co-cite the same patents. Cluster 2 contains 1-
hop and 2-hop citation meta-paths, which both indicate knowledge
flow among patents. Cluster 3 has meta-paths describing the rela-
tionships between inventors and his/her citing and cited patents.
In Cluster 4, the patents’ assignees, P-A, has unique semantics,
and thus no other meta-path is similar to it. Cluster 5 contains re-
lationships between patents via bibliographic information (inven-
tors and assignees) (except P-I). However, Cluster 6 also contains
several meta-paths with no similar semantics.
These analyses suggest that the representations of meta-paths
in HIN2Vec capture semantics of meta-paths very well, placing
meta-path vectors in the latent space closely with other vectors
of relevant semantics.
5.3
Link Prediction
In this section, we demonstrate that the same node vectors learned
by HIN2Vec can be used effectively for another application, link
prediction. We first introduce the experimental setup including
the experimental flow of link prediction and metrics for evaluation.
Then, we study different vector functions that transform two node
vectors into one vector for the purpose of link prediction. Finally,
we show the experimental results of HIN2Vec, in comparison with
other models.
5.3.1
Experimental Setup. We model the link prediction prob-
lem as a recommendation problem that aims to rank node pairs
in terms of their relevancy, which may lead to potential linkage
between them. Specifically, given a network, we first generate a
sub-network by selecting an edge class and randomly removing a
certain fraction (20% in our experiments) of edges of the selected
edge class as missing edges. After removing edges, we apply rep-
resentation learning models on the resulting sub-network. Then,
to perform the recommendation on the sub-network, we apply su-
pervised models to rank node pairs which are more likely to have
missing edges. In specific, we randomly select 2000 nodes to form
a training set. For a selected node, we first use its neighbors within
a certain number of hops as candidates to form a set of candidate
node pairs (a pair contains the node and a candidate node). This
candidate selection step aims to reduce the number of node pairs
to be ranked. We choose an appropriate hop number for different
networks to ensure the coverage of missing edges is greater than
85%. To form a training set, for each node pair, we label it with 1 if
they have a missing edge, and with 0, otherwise. We study differ-
ent vector functions (to be discussed later) to construct a feature
vector for the node pair based on the two nodes’ representations.
Finally, we apply linear SVM to perform ranking, by using the pre-
dicted confidence of each data with five-fold cross validation. We
use Mean Average Precision (MAP) and The top-k recall (recall@k)
as metrics for evaluation.
(1) Mean Average Precision (MAP): the mean of the average pre-
cision scores for the ranking result of each nodev. The average pre-
cision score (AveP) is the sum of the top-k precision (precision@k),
the percentage of top-k ranking results that hit the ground truth
over k. The equations of AveP and MAP are shown below.
AveP(v) = Σn
k=1
precision@k
k
MAP = ΣK
i=1AveP(vi )
K
(2) The top-k recall (recall@k): the percentage of the ground
truth or indicators ranked in the top-k returned results.
recall@k =
# of hits in top−k
# of positive documents in theдround truth
To construct a feature vector for a node pair based their node
vectors, we study four vector functions, Hadamard, Average, Minus
Session 9B: Representation Learning
CIKM’17, November 6-10, 2017, Singapore
1804
Table 2: Performance Evaluation of Node Classification
Blogcatalog
Yelp
DBLP
U.S. Patents
micro-f1
macro-f1
micro-f1
macro-f1
micro-f1
macro-f1
micro-f1
macro-f1
DeepWalk
0.244
0.140
0.276
0.165
0.481
0.463
0.675
0.676
LINE
0.239
0.128
0.270
0.163
0.449
0.429
0.66
0.663
node2vec
0.246
0.141
0.276
0.166
0.491
0.470
0.676
0.677
PTE
0.179
0.096
0.222
0.130
0.417
0.394
0.547
0.555
HINE
*0.250
*0.144
*0.2