A Multi-View Deep Learning Approach for Cross Domain
User Modeling in Recommendation Systems
Ali Elkahky
∗
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027, USA
ame2154@columbia.edu
Yang Song, Xiaodong He
Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052, USA
{yangsong,xiaohe}@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
Recent online services rely heavily on automatic personal-
ization to recommend relevant content to a large number of
users. This requires systems to scale promptly to accommo-
date the stream of new users visiting the online services for
the ﬁrst time. In this work, we propose a content-based rec-
ommendation system to address both the recommendation
quality and the system scalability. We propose to use a rich
feature set to represent users, according to their web brows-
ing history and search queries. We use a Deep Learning ap-
proach to map users and items to a latent space where the
similarity between users and their preferred items is maxi-
mized. We extend the model to jointly learn from features
of items from diﬀerent domains and user features by intro-
ducing a multi-view Deep Learning model. We show how
to make this rich-feature based user representation scalable
by reducing the dimension of the inputs and the amount of
training data. The rich user feature representation allows
the model to learn relevant user behavior patterns and give
useful recommendations for users who do not have any in-
teraction with the service, given that they have adequate
search and browsing history. The combination of diﬀerent
domains into a single model for learning helps improve the
recommendation quality across all the domains, as well as
having a more compact and a semantically richer user latent
feature vector. We experiment with our approach on three
real-world recommendation systems acquired from diﬀerent
sources of Microsoft products: Windows Apps recommen-
dation, News recommendation, and Movie/TV recommen-
dation. Results indicate that our approach is signiﬁcantly
better than the state-of-the-art algorithms (up to 49% en-
hancement on existing users and 115% enhancement on new
users).
In addition, experiments on a publicly open data
set also indicate the superiority of our method in compar-
ison with transitional generative topic models, for model-
∗Work done at Microsoft Research during the author’s sum-
mer internship.
Copyright is held by the International World Wide Web Conference Com-
mittee (IW3C2). IW3C2 reserves the right to provide a hyperlink to the
author’s site if the Material is used in electronic media.
WWW 2015, May 18–22, 2015, Florence, Italy.
ACM 978-1-4503-3469-3/15/05.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2736277.2741667.
ing cross-domain recommender systems. Scalability analy-
sis show that our multi-view DNN model can easily scale
to encompass millions of users and billions of item entries.
Experimental results also conﬁrm that combining features
from all domains produces much better performance than
building separate models for each domain.
General Terms
User Modeling
Keywords
User Modeling; Recommendation System; Multi-View Learn-
ing; Deep Learning
1.
INTRODUCTION
Recommendation systems and content personalization play
increasingly important role in modern online web services.
Many recent web services work on ﬁnding the most relevan-
t content to their users in order to maximize the engage-
ment with the site and minimize the time for ﬁnding the
relevant content. A major approach to this task is called
Collaborative Filtering (CF) [3, 19, 22, 21, 23, 6], which us-
es user’s previous history of interaction in the web site to
predict the most relevant content for recommendation. An-
other common approach is content-based recommendation
[14, 15], which uses features about items and/or users to
recommend new items to users based on the similarity be-
tween features. While both approaches work well in many
practical applications [6], they usually face certain limita-
tions and challenges especially with the increasing demand
of personalization and recommendation quality.
Speciﬁcally, CF needs a considerable amount of previous
history of interaction with the site before it can give high
quality recommendation. This problem is known as user cold
start problem [24]. In a newly established online service, the
problem becomes more severe since users have little or no
history of interaction with the site. Therefore, traditional
CF methods often fail to produce high quality recommen-
dation for new users.
On the other hand, content-based
recommendation methods extract features from each user
and/or item and use those features to make recommenda-
tions. For example, if two News articles Ni and Nj share the
same topic and a user liked article Ni, the system may rec-
ommend article Nj to the user. Similarly, if two users Ui and
Uj share certain similarities like their location, age or gen-
der, the system may recommend to user Uj the items that
user Ui liked before. In practice, research has shown that
content-based approach can handle the cold start problem
for new items well [32]. However, its eﬀectiveness is ques-
tionable when applying to recommendations for new users
since user-level features are usually more diﬃcult to acquire
and often generated from a limited information in user on-
line proﬁles, which failed to accurately capture the actual
user’s interests.
To address these limitations, we propose a recommenda-
tion system that leverages both user and item features. To
build user features, unlike many user proﬁle-based approach-
es, we propose to extract rich features from user’s browsing
and search histories to model user’s interests. The under-
lying assumption is that, users’ historical online activities
reﬂect a lot about user’s background and preference, and
therefore provide a precise insight of what items and top-
ics users might be interested in. For example, a user with
many infant-related queries and website visits (e.g., toys-
rus.com) may suggest that she is a mom for a new-born
baby.
With these abundantly available user online activ-
ities, recommending relevant items can be achieved more
eﬃciently and eﬀectively.
In our work we propose a novel deep learning approach ex-
tended from the Deep Structured Semantic Models (DSSM)
[9] to map users and items to a shared semantic space and
recommend items that have maximum similarity with users
in the mapped space. To achieve this, our model projects
the users and items, each of which is represented by a rich
feature set, through non-linear transformation layer(s) to a
compact shared latent semantic space where the similarity
between the mapping of the user and mappings of items liked
by the user is maximized. This allows the model to learn in-
teresting mappings such as people who visited ﬁfa.com will
like to read News articles about the World Cup and play
soccer games on PC or Xbox. The rich features in the user
side enable modeling the user’s behavior and thus overcome
many limitations in the content-based recommendation. It
also addresses the user cold start problem eﬀectively since
the model allows us to capture user interests from queries
and recommend related items (say music) even if they do not
have any history on using music services. Our deep learning
model has a ranking based objective which aims at ranking
positive examples (items that users like) higher than nega-
tive examples. This ranking based objective has shown to
be better for recommendation systems [9].
Furthermore, we extend the original DSSM model, which
is referred to as single-view DNN in this paper since it learns
from user features and items that come from a single domain,
to jointly learn features of items from diﬀerent domains. We
name the new model Multi-View Deep Neural Network (MV-
DNN). In literature, multi-view learning is a well-studied
area which learns from data that do not share common fea-
ture space [27]. We consider MV-DNN as a general Deep
learning approach in the multi-view learning setup. Speciﬁ-
cally, in our data sets with News, Apps and Movie/TV logs,
instead of building separate models for each of the domain
that naively maps the user features to item features within
the domain, we build a novel multi-view model that discov-
ers a single mapping for user features in the latent space
such that it is jointly optimized with features of items from
all domains. MV-DNN allows us to learn a better user rep-
resentation that leverages more data across domains and
tackles the data sparsity problem in a principled way by
leveraging user preference data from all domains. We show
in our experiments that this multi-view extension improves
the recommendation quality across all the domains at the
same time.
In addition, it is worth mentioning that the
non-linear mapping in the deep learning models enables us
to ﬁnd a compact representation of users in the latent space
which makes it much easier to store the learnt user mapping
and share the information among diﬀerent tasks.
One challenge in using deep learning to model rich user
features is the high dimension of the feature space which
makes the learning ineﬃcient and may impact the general-
ization ability of the model.
We propose several eﬀective
and scalable dimensionality reduction techniques that re-
duce the dimension to a reasonable size without the loss of
much information.
To summarize, the contributions in this work are:
(1)
use rich user features to build a general-purpose recommen-
dation system, (2) propose a deep learning approach for
content-based recommendation systems and study diﬀerent
techniques to scale-up the system, (3) introduce the novel
Multi-View Deep learning model to build recommendation
systems by combining data sets from multiple domains, (4)
address the user cold start issue which is not well-studied in
literature by leveraging the semantic feature mapping learn-
t from the multi-view DNN model, and (5) perform rigor-
ous experiments using four real-world large-scale data set
and show the eﬀectiveness of the proposed system over the
state-of-the-art methods by a signiﬁcantly large margin.
The rest of this paper is organized as following, ﬁrst we re-
view major approaches in recommendation systems includ-
ing papers that focus on the cold start problem in Section
2; in Section 3, we describe the data sets we work with and
detail the type of features we use to model the user and
the items in each domain, respectively. We then review the
basic DSSM model and discuss how it could be extended
for our setting in Section 4; in Section 5, we introduce the
multi-view deep learning model in details and discuss its ad-
vantages; in Section 6, we discuss the dimension reduction
methods to scale-up the model; in Section 7, 8, 9 & 10, we
present a comprehensive empirical study; we ﬁnally conclude
in Section 11 and suggest several future work.
2.
RELATED WORK
There has been extensive study on recommendation sys-
tems with a myriad of publications.
In this section, we
aim at reviewing a representative set of approaches that are
mostly related to our proposed approach.
In general, recommendation systems can be divided in-
to collaborative recommendation and content based recom-
mendation. Collaborative Recommendation systems recom-
mend an item to a user if similar users liked this item. Exam-
ples of this technique include nearest neighbor modeling [3],
Matrix Completion [19], Restricted Boltzmann machine [22],
Bayesian matrix factorization [21] etc. Essentially, these ap-
proaches are user collaborative ﬁltering, item collaborative
ﬁltering or both item and user collaborative ﬁltering.
In
user collaborative ﬁltering such as [3], the algorithm com-
putes the similarity between users based on items they liked.
Then, the scores of user-item pairs are computed by combin-
ing scores of this item given by similar users. Item based col-
laborative ﬁltering [23], computes similarity between items
based on users who like both items, then recommend the
user items similar to the ones she liked before. User-item
based collaborative ﬁltering ﬁnds a common space for items
and users based on user-item matrix and combines the item
and user representation to ﬁnd a recommendation. All ma-
trix factorization approaches like [19] and [21] are examples
of this technique. CF can be extended to large-scale setups
like in [6]. However, CF is generally unable to handle new
users and new items, a problem which is often referred to as
cold-start issue.
The second approach for recommendation systems is content-
based recommendation.
This approach extracts features
from item’s and/or user’s proﬁle and recommend items to
users according to these features. The underlying assump-
tion is that similar users tend to like items similar to the
items they liked previously. In [14], a method is proposed to
construct a search query with some features of items the user
liked before to ﬁnd other relevant items to recommend. An-
other example is presented in [15] where each user is modeled
by a distribution over News topics that is constructed from
articles she liked with a prior distribution of topic preference
computed using all users who share the same location. This
approach can handle new items (News articles) but for new
users the system used location feature only which implies
that new users are expected to see most frequent topics in
their location. This might be a good features to recommend
News but in other domains, for example Apps recommen-
dation, using only location information may not work as a
good prior over user’s preferences.
Recently, researchers have developed approaches that com-
bine both collaborative recommendation and content based
recommendation. In [16], the author used item features to
smooth user data before using collaborative ﬁltering. In [7],
the authors used Restricted Boltzmann Machine to learn
similarity between items, and then combined this with col-
laborative ﬁltering. A Bayesian approach was developed in
[32] to jointly learn the distribution of items, research pa-
pers in their case, over diﬀerent components (topics) and
the factorization of the rating matrix.
Handling the cold start issue in recommendation systems
is studied mainly for new items (items that have no rating
by any user).
As we mentioned before, all content based
ﬁltering can handle cold start for item, and there are some
methods that were developed and evaluated speciﬁcally for
this issue like in [24] and [7]. The work in [18] studied how
to learn user preferences for new users incrementally by rec-
ommending items that give the most information about user
preferences while minimizing the probability of recommend-
ing irrelevant content. User modeling via rich features have
been studied a lot recently. For example, it has been shown
that user search queries can be used to discover the similari-
ties between users [25]. Rich features from user search histo-
ry has also been used for personalized web search [26]. For
recommendation systems, the authors in [2] leveraged the
user’s historical search queries to build personalized taxono-
my for recommending Ads. On the other hand, researchers
have discovered that a user’s social behaviors can also be
used to build the proﬁle of the user. In [1], the authors used
user’s tweets in Twitter data to recommend News articles.
Most traditional recommendation system research focused
on data within a single domain. Recently, there has been an
increasing interest in cross domain recommendation. There
are diﬀerent approaches for addressing cross domain rec-
ommendation.
One approach is to assume that diﬀerent
domains share similar set of users but not the items, as il-
lustrated in [20]. In their work, the authors augmented data
from rating of movies and books from datasets that have
common users. The augmented data set was then used to
perform collaborative ﬁltering.
They showed that this in
particular helped the cases where users with little proﬁle
information in one of the domains (cold-start users). The
second approach addressed the scenarios where the same
set of items shared diﬀerent types of feedbacks in diﬀerent
domains like user clicks or user explicit rating. As shown
in [17], the authors introduced a coordinate system trans-
fer method for cross domain matrix factorization. In [12],
the authors studied the cross domain recommendation in
the case where there existed no shared users or items be-
tween domains. They developed a generative model to dis-
cover common clusters between diﬀerent domains. However,
a challenge in their approach is its ability to scale beyond
medium datasets due to the computational cost. A diﬀerent
approach was introduce in [28] for author collaboration rec-
ommendation where they built a topic model to recommend
authors to collaborate from diﬀerent research ﬁelds.
For many approaches in recommendation systems the ob-
jective function is to minimize the root mean squared error
on the user-item matrix reconstruction. Recently, ranking
based objective function has shown to be more eﬀective in
giving better recommendation as shown in [11].
Deep learning has recently been proposed for building rec-
ommendation systems for both collaborative and content
based approaches.
In [22], an RBM model was used for
collaborative ﬁltering. Deep learning for content based rec-
ommendation has been done for example in [30] where deep
learning was applied to learn embedding for music features.
This embedding was then used to regularize matrix factor-
ization in collaborative ﬁltering.
3.
DESCRIPTION OF THE DATA SETS
In this section introduces the data sets. We describe the
data collection process and the feature representations for
each data set, as well as some basic statistics of the data.
The four data sets used in this study were collected from
user logs of several Microsoft products, including (1) Search
engine logs from Bing Web vertical, (2) News article brows-
ing history from Bing News vertical, (3) App download logs
from Windows AppStore, and (4) Movie/TV view logs from
Xbox. All the logs were collected between December 2013
and June 2014, with primary focus on English-speaking mar-
kets including United States, Canada and Great Britain.
(User Features) We collected users’ search queries and
their clicked URLs from Bing to form user features. Queries
were ﬁrst normalized, stemmed and then split into unigram
features and URLs were shorten into domain-level only (e.g.,
www.linkedin.com) to reduce the feature dimension.
We
then used TF-IDF scores to keep only the most popular and
non-trivial features. Overall, we selected 3 million unigram
features and 500K domain features, leading to a total length
of 3.5-million user feature vector.
(News Features) We collected news article clicks from
Bing News vertical. Each News item is represented by three
parts of features. The ﬁrst part is the title features encoded
using letter tri-gram representation as we will describe in
the next section. Secondly, the top-level category of each
News (e.g., Entertainment) is encoded as binary features.
Finally, the Named Entities in each article, extracted using
Type
DataSet
UserCnt
Feature
Size
Joint
Users
User View
Search
20M
3.5M
/
News
5M
100K
1.5M
Item View
Apps
1M
50K
210K
Movie/TV
60K
50K
16K
Table 1: Statistics of the four data sets used in this paper.
The Joint Users column indicates the number of common
users between each item view and the user view.
an internal proprietary NLP parser, is encoded using letter
tri-gram as well. This results in a 100K feature vector.
(App Features) Users’ App download histories were col-
lected from Windows AppStore logs. The title of each App
is represented using letter tri-gram, combining with its cat-
egory (e.g., Game) features in the binary format. Do to the
nature of constant change of App descriptions, we decided
not to include that as part of the feature space. This results
in a 50K feature vector for Apps.
(Movie/TV Features) From Xbox logs, we collected the
Movie/TV view history for each Xbox user. The title and
description of each item were combined into text features
and then encoded using letter tri-gram. The genre is also
used as binary features. This results in a 50K feature vector
for Movie/TV.
In our neural network framework, user features are mapped
into the user view and the rest is mapped into diﬀerent
item views. For training purpose, each user view is matched
with an item view which contains the exact set of users. To
achieve this, we sub-sampled logged-in users (i.e., users with
uniquely annonymized and hashed Microsoft User IDs) from
each user-item view pair and performed inner join based on
their IDs. This results in diﬀerent number of users for each
user-item view pair. Table 1 depicts some basic statistics of
the data used in this paper.
4.
DSSM FOR USER MODELING IN REC-
OMMENDATION SYSTEMS
A deep structured semantic model (DSSM) is introduced
in [9] to enhance query document matching in the web search
context. Given the close relationship to our proposed multi-
view deep neural network, we brieﬂy review DSSM here.
The typical architecture of the DSSM is shown in Fig.
1.The input (raw text features) to the DNN is a high dimen-
sional term vector, e.g., raw counts of terms in a query or
a document without normalization. Then the DSSM pass-
es its input through two neural networks, one for each of
the two diﬀerent inputs, respectively, and maps them into
semantic vectors in a shared semantic space. For Web docu-
ment ranking, DSSM computes the relevance score between
a query and a document as the cosine similarity of their cor-
responding semantic vectors, and ranks documents by their
similarity scores to the query.
More formally, if we denote x as the input term vector, y
as the output vector, li, i = 1, ..., N −1, as the intermediate
hidden layers, Wi as the i-th weight matrix, and bi as the
i-th bias term, we have
l1
=
W1x
li
=
f(Wili−1 + bi), i = 2, ..., N −1
y
=
f(WNlN−1 + bN)
(1)
Figure 1: The illustration of the deep structured semantic
model (DSSM).
where we use the tanh function as the activation function at
the output layer and the hidden layers li, i = 2, ..., N −1 :
f(x) = 1 −e−2x
1 + e−2x
(2)
The semantic relevance score between a query Q and a
document D is then measured as:
R(Q, D) = cosine(yQ, yD) =
yQ
T yD
||yQ|| · ||yD||
(3)
where yQ and yD are the semantic vectors of the query
and the document, respectively. In Web search, given the
query, the documents are sorted by their semantic relevance
scores.
Conventionally, each word w is represented by a one-hot
word vector where the dimensionality of the vector is the size
of the vocabulary. However, the vocabulary size is often very
large in real-world Web search tasks, and the one-hot vector
word representation makes model learning very expensive.
Therefore, the DSSM uses a word hashing layer to represent
a word by a letter-trigram vector.
For example, given a
word (e.g. web), after adding word boundary symbols (e.g.
#web#), the word is segmented into a sequence of letter-n-
grams (e.g. letter-tri-grams: #-w-e, w-e-b, e-b-#). Then,
the word is represented as a count vector of letter-tri-grams.
For example, the letter-trigram representation of web is:
In Figure 1, the ﬁrst layer matrix W1 denotes the letter-
trigram matrix transforming from a term-vector to its letter-
trigram count vector, which requires no learning.
Even
though the total number of English words may grow to be ex-
tremely large, the total number of distinct letter-trigrams in
English (or other similar languages) is often limited. There-
fore, it can generalize to new words unseen in the training
data.
In training, it is assumed that a query is relevant to the
documents that are clicked on for that query, and the param-
eters of the DSSM, i.e., the weight matrix Wi, are trained
using this signal.
I.e., ﬁrst the posterior probability of a
document given a query is estimated from the semantic rel-
evance score between them through a softmax function
P(D|Q) =
exp(γR(Q,D))
P
D′∈D exp(γR(Q,D′))
(4)
where γ is a smoothing factor in the softmax function,
which is usually set empirically on a held-out data set in our
experiment. D denotes the set of candidate documents to
be ranked. Ideally, D should contain all possible documents.
In practice, for each (query, clicked-document) pair, denoted
by (Q, D+) where Q is a query and D+ is the clicked docu-
ment, we approximate D by including D+ and N randomly
selected unclicked documents, denote by {D−
j ; j = 1, , N}.
In training, the model parameters are estimated to maxi-
mize the likelihood of the clicked documents given the queries
across the training set.
L(Λ) = −log
Y
(Q,D+)
P(D+|Q)
(5)
where Λ denotes the parameter set of the neural networks.
5.
MULTI-VIEW DEEP NEURAL NETWORK
The DSSM can be viewed as a multi-learning framework
where it maps two diﬀerent views of the data into a shared
view. In that sense, it can be viewed in a more general set-
ting to learn a shared mapping between two diﬀerent views.
Figure 2: Multi-view DNN for multiple domain recommen-
dation.
It uses a DNN to map high-dimensional sparse
features (e.g., raw features of users, News, App) into low-
dimensional dense features in a joint semantic space.. The
ﬁrst hidden layer, with 50k units, accomplishes word hash-
ing. The word-hashed features are then projected through
multiple layers of non-linear projections. The ﬁnal layer’s
neural activities in this DNN form the feature in the seman-
tic space. Note that the input feature dimension x (5M and
3M) in this ﬁgure is hypothetical as in practice each view
can have arbitrary number of features. See text for details.
In this work, we propose an extension to the DSSM where
we have more than two views of the data and we call this
Multi-view DNN (MV-DNN). In this setting, we have v + 1
views, one pivot view called Xu and other v auxiliary views
X1 through Xv and each Xi has its own input domain Xi ∈
Rdi. Each view also has its own non-linear mapping layer(s)
fi(Xi, Wi) which transforms Xi into shared semantic space
Yi. The training data contains a set of samples. The jth
sample has an instance of the pivot view Xu,j and one active
auxiliary view Xa,j where a is the index of the active view in
sample j. All other views input Xi:i̸=a are set to 0 vectors.
The objective of is ﬁnding a non-linear mapping for each
view such that the sum of similarities, in the semantic space
between mapping of the pivot view Yu and mappings of all
Algorithm 1 Training Multi-View DNN
1: Input: N = # of view pairs, M = # of training iterations,
UA = user view architecture,
IA = {IA1, ...IAN} item view architecture,
UD = {UD1, ...UDN} user input ﬁles,
ID = {ID1, ...IDN} item input ﬁles,
WU = user view weight matrix,
WI = {WI1, ...WIN} item view weight matrices
2: Initialization
3: Initialize WU and WI using UA and IA
4: for m = 1 to M
5:
for v = 1 to N
6:
TU ←UDv
7:
TI ←IDv
8:
train WU and WI using TU and TI
9:
end for
10: end for
11: Output: WU = ﬁnal user weight matrix,
WI = ﬁnal set of item view weight matrices
other views Y1, ...Yv is maximized. Formally, we have:
p = arg
max
Wu,W1,..Wv
N
X
j=1
eαa cos(Yu,Ya,j )
P
X′∈Rda eα cos(Yu,fa(X′,Wa))
(6)
The architecture of MV-DNN is shown in ﬁgure 2. In our
recommendation systems setup, we set the pivot view Xu
to user features and create auxiliary view for each diﬀerent
type of items we aim to recommend.
The intuition for having this objective function is to try
to ﬁnd a single mapping for user’s features, namely Wu, that
can transform users features into a space that matches al-
l diﬀerent items the user liked in diﬀerent views/domains.
This way of sharing parameters allows the domains that do
not have enough information to learn good mapping through
other domains which have more data. It should work well
if the assumption that users who have similar News articles
taste also have similar taste in other domains which mean-
s those domains can beneﬁt from user mapping learned by
News domain. If this assumption is valid, then samples from
any domain will help in grouping similar users more accu-
rately in all domains. The empirical results showed that the
assumption is reasonable in the domains we experimented
on, which we elaborate more in the experiment sections.
5.1
Training MV-DNN
MV-DNN can be trained using Stochastic Gradient De-
cent (SGD). In practice, each training example contains a
pairs of inputs, one for the user view and one for the data
views. Therefore, despite the fact that there exists only one
user view in our model, it is often more convenient to have
N user feature ﬁles, each of which corresponds to an item
feature ﬁle, where N is the total number of user-item view
pairs. In Algorithm 1, we sketch the high-level process of
training MV-DNN. When taking the derivative with respect
to all Wi ∈{Wu, W1, ..Wv} we end up with only two non-
zero derivatives
∂p
∂Wu and
∂p
∂Wa which allow us to apply the
same update rules for DSSM as in [9] substituting q by Xu
and d by Xa.
5.2
Advantages of MV-DNN
Although MV-DNN is extended from the original DSSM
framework, it has several unique characteristics that makes
it superior than its predecessor.
First of all, the original
DSSM model uses for both the query view and document
view the same size of feature dimensions, and preprocessed
using the same representation (letter tri-gram for example).
This poses a huge restrictions in the feature composition
step. Due to the heterogeneity nature of recommendation
systems, it is quite likely that the user view and item view
pose diﬀerent input features. Also, many types of features
cannot be optimally represented using letter trigram. For
example, the URL domain feature often contains preﬁx and
suﬃx like www, com, org which will be mapping to the same
feature if letter tri-gram is applied. In practice, we have dis-
covered that the letter tri-gram representation works ideally
in the case that the input raw text is short (e.g., query text
and document title in the original DSSM model), but be-
comes inappropriate to model user level features which of-
ten contain a large collection of queries and URL domains.
By removing this constraint, the new MV-DNN model can
incorporate categorical features such as movie genre and ap-
p category, geospatial features such as country and region,
as well as raw text features represented using uni-grams or
bi-grams from user inputs.
Secondly, MV-DNN has the capability of scaling up to
many diﬀerent domains which the original DSSM framework
is unable to. By performing pair-wise training between each
user-item view pair as described in Algorithm 1, our model
can easily adopt new sets of view pairs which may contain
completely independent sets of users and items at any stage
of the training process, e.g., adding a new data set from
Xbox games.
By alternating user-view pairs during each
training iteration, our model can eventually converge to an
optimal embedding of user view that is trained through all
item views. Note that although we can have diﬀerent user
sets in diﬀerent item views in theory, during our experiment,
we choose to keep the same set of users across all views with
the consideration of both convenience and the ease of feature
normalization.
6.
DIMENSION AND DATA REDUCTION
In practice, the proposed deep learning approach often
needs to handle a huge amount of training examples in high
dimensional feature spaces for the user view. In order to
scale the system up, we propose several dimensionality re-
duction techniques to reduce the number of features in the
user view. Then, we propose an idea to compact and sum-
marize user training examples which reduces the number of
training data to be linear to the number of users.
6.1
Top Features
One simple dimensionality reduction approach for user
features is to select the top-K most frequent features. We
select all features that have a probability of 0.001 or greater
to be picked by a user. The main underlying hypothesis is
that users can be described well using a relatively small set
of frequent features that explains the users’ common online
behavior.
Note that as described in Section 3, the user’s
raw features are preprocessed using TF-IDF scores so that
the top features we select no longer contains common stop
words in search queries. This resulted in 83K user features.
6.2
K-means
K-means [8] is a well-known clustering technique aims at
creating a number of clusters such that the sum of distances
between each point and its nearest cluster is minimized:
arg min
C1,..Ck
N
X
i=1
min
Cj∈{C1,..Ck} distance(Xi, Cj),
(7)
Where Xi is a data point and Cj indicates a cluster centroid.
K-means has shown good performance as a way to learn un-
supervised features in vision [5]. The basic idea is to group
similar features together into one cluster and generate a new
feature vector Y which has the size equal to number of clus-
ters K and has number of appearances of features in cluster
i as value of its ith component. To do this we represent each
feature using a vector fi of length U where U is the number
users in the training data and fi(j) equals to the number of
times user i has feature j. fi are then normalized to have
length 1. One important aspect in running K-means is that
the relevant distance here is the angle between diﬀerent fea-
ture vectors which can be computed using cosine similarity.
Then the reduced dimensional vector Yi is created for each
user vector fi as follows: denote 1 ≤Cls(a) ≤K the cluster
assigned to feature a, we can compute Yi using:
Yi(j) =
X
a:Xi(a)>0&Cls(a)=j
fi(a)
(8)
To be able to extract a reasonable number of features us-
ing K-means we need to have a relatively large number of
clusters, since a small number of clusters (say 100) will re-
sults in large chunk of features to be in the same cluster
considering the size of user features to be 3.5M. This will
hence generate features that are diﬃcult to learn useful pat-
tern from. In order to mitigate this issue, we set the number
of clusters to be 10k. This means that on average there are
350 features per cluster. The large size of clusters and raw
features makes K-means computationally expensive to run.
In our experiment, we use a cloud-based Map-Reduce im-
plementation for K-means [4].
6.3
Local sensitive Hashing
Local Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [10] works by projecting
the data using a random projection matrix into a much lower
dimensional space such that the pairwise cosine distance in
the original space is still preserved in the new space. LSH
requires a transformation matrix A ∈Rd×k, where d is the
number of features in the original space and k is the number
of random projections used. This means That A contains k
diﬀerent projection, indicated by Ai, each of which takes X
vector and output a single hash value Yi. The output vector
Y ∈Rk of LSH can be found by concatenating all diﬀerent
hash values of Yi. Speciﬁcally, to compute each Yi we use
the following equation:
Yi =
(
1
if AiX ≥0
0
else.
(9)
The cosine similarity between two vectors X1, X2 ∈Rd
can be approximated by cos

H(Y1,Y2)
k
π

where H(Y1, Y2)
is the hamming distance between the LSH of input vectors.
In order to preserve cosine similarity with higher accura-
cy we need to increase the number of projections used k.
We used k = 10, 000, the same as used for K-means clus-
ters.
While LSH can be applied to each vector indepen-
dently and all projection can be computed independently
which makes the algorithm highly distributable under the
Map-Reduce framework, the algorithm requires the genera-
tion of the transformation matrix A which is our case has
3.5M × 104 entries generated from N(0, 1), requiring about
300GB storage. Also, A must be stored on each node dur-
ing the computation of LSH vectors. These issues make LSH
prohibitively expensive in the Map-Reduce framework.
Many solutions have been proposed to address this prob-
lem. A lot of them are based on generating sparse A [13].
Here, we used the pooling trick introduced in [31]. The idea
is to keep a pool B of size m of random numbers generated
from N(0, 1) where m is usually signiﬁcantly smaller than
the size of a transformation matrix A. To get the entry in
Aij one simply applies consistent hash function of i, j to get
an index in B and look up the value. In our experiments
we set m = 1, 000, 000 which is more than 10, 000 times re-
duction in memory requirement and can be easily stored in
each node in during Map-Reduce using only 10M storage.
6.4
Reduce the Number of Training Examples
The training data for each view contains a set of pairs
(Useri, Itemj) such that Useri liked Itemj. In practice, a
user may like many items which sometimes cause the train-
ing data to be very large. For example, in our News recom-
mendation data set, the number of pairs is well over 1 billion
and causes the training to be very slow even when using an
optimized GPU implementation.
To alleviate this problem, we compress the training data
so that it includes a single training example per user per
each view. Speciﬁcally, the compressed training example in-
cludes the user features paired with the features with an
average score of all items the user liked in that view. This
reduces the number of training examples per view to the
number of users in the training data, which greatly reduce
the training data size. Note that a concern of this technique
is that the objective function now becomes maximizing the
similarity between user features and the average features of
items the user liked.
There is a slight diﬀerence when it
comes to evaluation since during test time each user is given
only one single item. However, this approximation is neces-
sary to make the system scale up well. Also, experimental
results will show that this approximation still generates very
promising results in practice.
7.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this section, we explain the process of our empirical
study and brieﬂy review several recommendation algorithms
we compared to as baselines.
For each data set, we aim at evaluating the system perfor-
mance on users who already have previous interaction in this
domain (old users) and users who did not have any previous
interaction but have some search and browsing history that
can be encoded into user view (new users). For evaluation,
the data sets were split into training and test sets using the
following criteria:
First, each user is randomly assigned a label of either
“train” or “test” with the probability ratio of 0.9:0.1. Then,
for each user with a “test” label, we further label them as
“old” or “new” user with the probability ratio of 0.8:0.2. For
those labeled as “old” users, 50% of their items are used for
training and the rest for test. On the other hand, for “new”
users, their items are only used for testing as the user-item
pairs are guaranteed to never appear in the training pro-
cess. This way, these users are indeed completely new to the
system. The details of the dataset breakdown is in table 2.
In terms of performance evaluation, for each (useri, itemj)
pair in the training data we select 9 other random items
itemr1, ...itemr9, where r1 though r9 are random indices,
and create 9 testing pairs (useri, itemrk), 1 ≤k ≤9 and
added to the testing data set.
The evaluation criteria is
to measure of how well the system ranks the correct pair
(useri, itemj) against the other random items for the same
user (useri, itemrk). Therefore, we employed two metrics
for this: (1) the Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR), which com-
putes the inverse of the rank of the correct item among other
items and average the score across the whole testing data,
and (2) Precision@1 (P@1) which computes the percentage
of times the system ranks the correct item as the top item.
We compared to several baseline systems described below:
Standard SVD Matrix decomposition: In this base-
line, we construct the user/item matrix and perform matrix
decomposition using SVD. This is a standard baseline for
collaborative ﬁltering techniques that does not use any fea-
tures from items or users. In practice, this baseline is com-
putationally feasible only on relatively small data set (in our
case, the Apps data). In addition, this approach cannot give
recommendation on new users since they do not appear in
the user-item matrix.
Most Frequent Items: Since SVD is unable to handle
new user recommendation, this approach is used as trivial
baseline for new users. It works by ﬁrst computing the fre-
quency of each item in the training data, and then for each
testing sample it ranks (useri, itemj) with respect to other
random items according to their frequency in training set.
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA): CCA [29] is
a traditional multi-view learning technique aims at ﬁnding
two pairs of linear transformations, one for each input view,
such that the correlation between transformed data is maxi-
mized. It is similar to DSSM with two main diﬀerences: (1)
CCA often uses linear transformation, despite there exists
non-linear transformations through kernel versions of CCA,
which is often computationally prohibited in large-scale ex-
periments, and (2) CCA maximizes the correlation under
certain ﬁxed variance constraints while DSSM maximizes
the rank of the correct pairs.
The ranking objective has
shown be to a better objective recommendation systems. In
our experiment for CCA, we only used top-k users features s-
ince the other two dimension reduction techniques, K-means
and LSH, produce a non-sparse feature vectors which make
the correlation matrix too dense to be eﬃciently computed.
Collaborative Topic Regression (CTR): CTR [32]
is a recently-developed recommendation system that com-
bines both Bayesian matrix factorization and items features
to create a recommendation for items. It has shown to be
successful in academic paper recommendations. In the C-
TR model, two inputs are given: a collaborative matrix and
items features (represented using bag-of-words). The model
matches users to items by maximizing the reconstruction er-
ror of the collaborative matrix and leveraging item features
as an extra signal. This helps to model new items that did
not appear before in the training data. For new user rec-
ommendation in our scenario, we take the transpose of the
collaborative matrix A as input and supply user features
instead of items features.
For our proposed approach, for both Apps and News data
sets, we ﬁrst run three sets of experiments to train single-
view DNN models, each of which corresponds to a dimension
reduction method in Section 6 (SV-TopK,SV-Kmeans and
SV-LSH). Then we run another three sets of experiments
for MV-DNN. The ﬁrst two combine Apps and News data
using TopK and Kmeans user features (MV-TopK and MV-
Kmeans). The third set of experiments train a joint model
between Apps, News and Movie/TV features with TopK
user features (MV-TopK w/Xbox).
8.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 3 and 4 shows results obtained from diﬀerent ap-
proaches in App and News data respectively1. We separate
the algorithms into three types for clariﬁcation: Type I are
baseline algorithms; Type II are our single-view models and
Type III are multi-view DNN models. We see that the naive
most-frequent-item baseline performs very poorly which con-
ﬁrms that the simple solutions to new users will not work
well in our cases. It is also shown that standard SVD ma-
trix factorization is not good enough in this task even for
the current users that have entries in the collaborative ﬁl-
tering matrix. Surprisingly, the CCA model performed no
better than random guess in Apps data which shows that us-
ing the non-linear mapping in DSSM plus the ranking based
objective are important to the system. The CTR model [32]
performed reasonably well for current users but not as good
for the new users.
For the single-view DNN (shown as Type II), the results
indicated that the performance is dependent on the dimen-
sionality reduction approach used. It can be seen that the
best one for both Apps and News data was the top-K fea-
ture dimension method which outperformed other two by a
large margin. This can be viewed as a conﬁrmation of the
hypothesis that users can be model with a relatively small
set of informative features. It also indicates that K-means
and LSH are less eﬀective to capture the semantics of the
user behavior correctly. As a head-to-head comparison be-
tween our single-view models (Type II) and traditional rec-
ommendation methods (Type I), our best model (SV-TopK)
outperformed the best baselines CTR [32], which also lever-
aged item features for recommendation, by 11% for all users
(0.497 vs.
0.448 MRR score), and 36.7 % for new users
(0.436 vs. 0.319 MRR score), relatively. For P@1, we see
a much larger improvement: 13% for all users and 88.7%for
new users, which shows the eﬀectiveness of our system on
recommending top-rated items.
Furthermore, for MV-DNN, results showed that adding
more domains indeed helps to improve all domains at the
same time. Speciﬁcally, by combining both News view and
App view for training, we see a signiﬁcant improvement on
both News and App data sets in both metrics. Speciﬁcally,
for the App data shown in Table 3, the MRR score increased
from 0.497 to 0.517 for all users when comparing to the best
single-view model, which is a 4% relative increase comparing
to the single-view model. More importantly, we see a much
bigger improvement on new users where one view’s lack of
new user data can be compensated by the data from other
views. This is demonstrated by the 7% MRR (from 0.436
to 0.466) and 11% P@1 (from 0.268 to 0.297) relative im-
provement on the new users of App data set. Therefore, we
1Due to the sensitivity of Xbox data, we are unable to show
the individual results for Movie/TV recommendation per-
formance. However, in the tables, we still show how Xbox
view can be used to enhance the performance of other views.
are eager to know: can we safely conclude that more views
can indeed improve the performance of the system? To ﬁnd
the answer to this hypothesis, we further added the Xbox
data into the framework and trained a MV-DNN model with
three user-item view pairs. The results are quite encourag-
ing: MRR scores are further improved by 6% for all users
and 8% for new users in App data, relatively. On the other
hand, by comparing to the state-of-the-art algorithm, our
best MV-DNN (with Xbox view) with top-K features per-
formed 25.2% better than the CTR model for all users (from
0.277 to 0.347) , and 115% better for new users (from 0.142
to 0.306), for P@1.
Similar results can also be observed for the News data in
Table 4, where MV-DNN scored 49% better for all users and
101% better for new users than the CTR model, relatively.
Note that in this table, the results for CCA and SVD are
missing. Due to the extreme size of the training data which
contains 1.5 Million users with over 1 Billion entries, these
two traditional algorithms failed miserably to handle such
big data. We will detail our discussion on the scalability in
the next section but it is quite evident here that our DNN
based approach can easily scale up to billion-entry comput-
ing capacity while yield excellent recommendation results.
In order to explore the eﬀectiveness of the learned pat-
tern from the system, we perform the following experiment
to test the recommendation performance with single-feature
inputs.
Speciﬁcally, we took the best performing system
(MV-DNN with top-k features) and construct user features
with only one domain feature turned on. The resulting user
feature thus has only one value which is the ID of the do-
main. We then run our model for prediction against other
views in order to ﬁnd the top-matched News and Apps a-
mong all existing items. Table 5 shows some of those results.
It can be seen that the learned recommendation system is
indeed quite eﬀective. In the ﬁrst example, we assume a us-
er has only visited brackobama.com. The top matched news
show all related information regarding President Obama and
Obamacare health, which are all relevant to the website. On
the other hand, the top matched Apps are also related to
health in this case. In the second example, we have a user
who visited www.spiegel.de, a major online German News
Website, which is not telling a lot about users except they
can read German. The system matches articles for them on
FIFA world cup 2014 which seems to be a common inter-
est for Germans in this time span. In last example where
the user seems to have interests in baby-related information,
both the top matched News and Apps are quite relevant to
baby, pregnancy and etc.
9.
EXPERIMENTS ON PUBLIC DATA
To further show the strength of our approach in modeling
cross-domain users, we perform a set of experiments on the
public data2 by the authors in [28]. The data set contain-
s authors from diﬀerent research ﬁelds and the objective is
to recommend authors from another ﬁeld for cross-domain
collaboration. The data contains 33,739 authors from ﬁve
domains (data mining, theory etc.), where each data en-
try speciﬁes the name of the research ﬁeld, the title and
abstract of a paper, the list of authors and the year the pa-
per got published. We use a single-view DNN to model this
cross-domain collaboration (e.g., collaboration between data
2Available at http://arnetminer.org/billboard/collaboration
Data Set
Training
Testing
Number Of u-
nique users
Number of u-
nique items
Number
of
training pairs
Number
of
new users
Number
of
test pairs for
old users
Number
of
test pairs for
new users
Apps Data
200K
55k
2.5M
1K
11K
2K
News Data
1.5M
5M
> 1B
5K
50K
10K
Xbox Data
16K
10K
45K
1K
10K
3K
Table 2: Details of the Train/Test breakdown for the three data sets used to evaluate our proposed approach.
User View with
Single Domain
ID Feature
Top Matched News
Top Matched Apps
barackobama.com
Obama to Delay Obamacare Again to Help Democrats
7 Minutes Fitter
Froma Harrop: Democrats should not run away 