A Semi-Personalized System for User Cold Start
Recommendation on Music Streaming Apps
Léa Briand
Deezer Research
research@deezer.com
Guillaume Salha-Galvan
Deezer Research
LIX, École Polytechnique
Walid Bendada
Deezer Research
LAMSADE, Univ. Paris Dauphine
Mathieu Morlon
Deezer Research
Viet-Anh Tran
Deezer Research
ABSTRACT
Music streaming services heavily rely on recommender systems to
improve their users’ experience, by helping them navigate through
a large musical catalog and discover new songs, albums or artists.
However, recommending relevant and personalized content to new
users, with few to no interactions with the catalog, is challenging.
This is commonly referred to as the user cold start problem. In this
applied paper, we present the system recently deployed on the mu-
sic streaming service Deezer to address this problem. The solution
leverages a semi-personalized recommendation strategy, based on
a deep neural network architecture and on a clustering of users
from heterogeneous sources of information. We extensively show
the practical impact of this system and its e￿ectiveness at predict-
ing the future musical preferences of cold start users on Deezer,
through both o￿ine and online large-scale experiments. Besides,
we publicly release our code as well as anonymized usage data from
our experiments. We hope that this release of industrial resources
will bene￿t future research on user cold start recommendation.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems ! Recommender systems; Personalization.
KEYWORDS
Recommender Systems; User Cold Start; Music Streaming Service;
Semi-Personalization; Heterogeneous Data; A/B Testing.
ACM Reference Format:
Léa Briand, Guillaume Salha-Galvan, Walid Bendada, Mathieu Morlon,
and Viet-Anh Tran. 2021. A Semi-Personalized System for User Cold Start
Recommendation on Music Streaming Apps. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD ’21),
August 14–18, 2021, Virtual Event, Singapore. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3447548.3467110
1
INTRODUCTION
Recommender systems are essential tools for online services provid-
ing access to large catalogs, such as e-commerce websites [39, 46],
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for pro￿t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ￿rst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speci￿c permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’21, August 14–18, 2021, Virtual Event, Singapore
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8332-5/21/08...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3447548.3467110
and video [9, 13] or music [2, 10, 19, 36] streaming services. They
help users navigate through massive amounts of content, discover
new products, movies or songs they might like, and are known to
improve the user experience and engagement [6, 31, 36, 51].
A prevalent approach to e￿ectively recommend personalized
content on these online services is collaborative ￿ltering which,
broadly, consists in predicting the preferences of a user within a set
of items by leveraging the known preferences of some similar users
[9, 20, 36, 41]. In particular, several recent works emphasized the
empirical e￿ectiveness of latent models for collaborative ￿ltering at
addressing industrial-level challenges [9, 13, 19, 39]. In a nutshell,
these models aim at directly learning vector space representations,
a.k.a. embeddings, of users and items where proximity should re-
￿ect user preferences, typically via the factorization of a user-item
interaction matrix [18, 20, 21] or with neural network architectures
processing usage data [9, 30, 45].
However, the performances of these models tend to signi￿cantly
degrade for new users who only had few interactions with the
catalog [7, 26, 36]. They might even become unsuitable for users
with no interaction at all, who are absent from user-item matrices
in standard algorithms [5, 15, 24]. This is commonly referred to as
the user cold start problem [5, 24, 26, 36, 44]. Yet, recommending
relevant content to these new users is crucial for online services.
Indeed, a new user facing low-quality recommendations might have
a bad ￿rst impression and decide to stop using the service.
In this applied paper, we present a system recently deployed
on the global music streaming app Deezer1, connecting 14 mil-
lion active users from 180 countries to 73 million music tracks,
to practically address this problem. The solution starts from an
existing large-scale latent model for collaborative ￿ltering, period-
ically trained on Deezer’s warm users (see Section 3). It automat-
ically integrates cold users into the existing embedding space, by
collecting heterogeneous sources of demographic and interaction
information on these users at registration day, processed by a deep
neural network, and by leveraging a segmentation of warm users to
strengthen the ￿nal representations and provide semi-personalized
recommendations to cold users by the end of their registration day.
The proposed system is suitable for an online production use
on a large-scale app such as Deezer. Throughout this paper, we
extensively show its practical impact and its empirical e￿ectiveness
at predicting the future musical preferences of cold users, through
both o￿ine experiments on data extracted from Deezer and an
online A/B test on the actual Deezer app. We also emphasize how
1https://www.deezer.com
arXiv:2106.03819v1  [cs.IR]  7 Jun 2021
KDD ’21, August 14–18, 2021, Virtual Event, Singapore
L. Briand et al.
this system enables us to provide more interpretable music recom-
mendations. Last, along with this paper we publicly release our
source code as well as anonymized usage data of Deezer users from
our o￿ine experiments. Besides making our results reproducible,
we believe that this open-source release of industrial resources
will bene￿t future research on user cold start, by providing to the
scienti￿c community a relevant real-world benchmark dataset to
evaluate future recommender systems.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce
the user cold start problem more precisely and mention previous
research e￿orts on this topic. In Section 3, we present the semi-
personalized recommender system deployed on the Deezer app.
We report and discuss our experimental setting, our data, and our
results in Section 4, and we conclude in Section 5.
2
PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we provide a precise formulation of the problem we
aim at addressing. We also give an overview of the existing related
work. Some of the mentioned approaches will constitute relevant
baselines to evaluate the e￿ectiveness of our system.
2.1
Problem Formulation
Throughout this paper, we consider a catalog of < music tracks
available on the music streaming app Deezer. We assume that the
catalog remains ￿xed over time, which we later discuss. At time C,
Deezer gathers =C warm users who, according to some criteria inter-
nally ￿xed by our data scientists, had a su￿ciently large number of
interactions with the catalog, e.g. enough listening sessions, to be
used in the training of our recommender systems. We consider a la-
tent model for collaborative ￿ltering [9, 20, 21, 30]. From the observed
warm user-track interactions and following the processes described
in Section 3, this model learns a vector space representation of
both users and tracks. In this embedding space, each user 8 and
track 9 are represented by 3-dimensional vectors (with 3 ⌧< and
3 ⌧=C), say D8 2 R3 and E9 2 R3, capturing musical preferences.
To recommend relevant new tracks to the user 8, we leverage user-
item similarity measures 5 (D8, E9) in this space, encoding user-item
a￿nities. These measures are typically based on an inner-product
or a cosine similarity [21]. The model is updated at regular time
intervals to take into account the evolution of preferences.
Everyday, new users, referred to as cold, will register to the ser-
vice. They will only have few to no interactions with the catalog
during their registration day. As explained in the introduction, a
straightforward inclusion of these cold users in the aforementioned
latent model is unsuitable [5, 15, 24, 26]. Waiting for them to be-
come warm users (according to internal criteria) is also undesirable:
indeed, recommending relevant content as soon as possible is cru-
cial, as new users facing low-quality recommendations might make
up their mind on this ￿rst impression and quickly stop using the
service. As a consequence, we aim at addressing the following
problem: given an existing latent model for collaborative ￿ltering
learning an embedding space from a set of warm users, how can we
e￿ectively include new cold users into this same space, by the end
of their registration day on Deezer? In the remainder of this paper,
we will evaluate the estimated embedding vectors of cold users by
assessing their ability at predicting the future musical preferences
of these users on Deezer after their registration day, through the
evaluation tasks and metrics presented in Section 4.
2.2
Related Work
The user cold start problem has initiated signi￿cant research e￿orts
over the past decade [4, 5, 7, 15, 22–24, 26, 27, 31, 36, 38, 39, 44, 50,
51]. In the following, we provide an overview of the most relevant
work w.r.t. our approach. We refer the interested reader to some
recent surveys [15, 31, 51] for a more exhaustive review of the
existing literature, and to [31, 39, 42, 46] for a presentation of the
related item cold start problem, which is out of our scope.
A prevalent strategy to address the user cold start problem in the
total absence of usage data consists in relying on metadata related
to new users, and notably on demographic information (such as
the age or country of the user) collected during registration [12, 22,
23, 26, 31, 48]. In particular, various approaches aim at clustering
warm users, and subsequently assign cold users to existing clusters
by leveraging these metadata [7, 11, 26, 31, 41, 48]. Building upon
these works, the model we present in Section 3 will also leverage
demographic information and incorporate a clustering component.
Besides, one can enrich such systems by explicitly asking new
users to rate items from the catalog through various interview
processes, leading to hybrid models based on preferences and side
information [15, 31, 38]. On the industry side, Net￿ix [13] and
Spotify [19] are famous examples of services implementing such
onboarding session for new users; as explained in Section 3, Deezer
also adopted this strategy. As the inclusion of an onboarding is
not always possible in production, authors of [11] propose to use
bandit algorithms to assign cold users to warm user segments, while
[27, 37] resort to social media data to connect similar users.
Sometimes, cold users do have a few interactions with the catalog
on their registration day. In this case, exploiting such usage signal,
in addition to the aforementioned side information, can signi￿cantly
improve recommendations [5, 17, 36, 41]. In particular, several re-
cent works emphasized the e￿ectiveness of deep learning models
at dealing with such heterogeneous settings [4, 5, 9, 24, 31, 44, 51].
Notably, authors of [9] explain how a scalable deep neural net-
work, processing various user-item interactions (including watched
videos, search queries...) and demographic information to learn em-
bedding vectors, improved the YouTube recommender system. To
represent interactions, they average various latent representations
of watched/searched items from a same user session, allowing fea-
tures to have the same dimension for each user. In the method we
present in Section 3, we will draw inspiration from their approach
to preprocess the user features serving as input to our embedding
model. However, a direct comparison to [9] is impossible, as no com-
plete description nor implementation of the YouTube recommender
system was made publicly available.
Among the reproducible deep learning approaches, DropoutNet
[44] emerged as one of the most powerful latent collaborative ￿l-
tering models, addressing cold start while preserving performances
for warm users. This neural network takes into account usage and
content data, and explicitly simulates the cold start situation during
training by applying dropout [40], alternatively to user and item
embedding layers. DropoutNet relies on the assumption that data is
missing at random, with the risk of introducing biased predictions
A Semi-Personalized System for User Cold Start Recommendation on Music Streaming Apps
KDD ’21, August 14–18, 2021, Virtual Event, Singapore
Warm users
embeddings 
Demographics &
interactions of warm
users at registration
day
Training dataset to
learn the future
embeddings using 
available information at
registration day
Embeddings
prediction model
Demographics &
interactions of cold
users at registration
day
Segmentation model
Recommendations by
segment
Predicted
embeddings for cold
users
Predicted segment for
cold users
Recommendations for
cold users
Segmentation
centroids
Offline
Online
(1)
(2)
(3)
Figure 1: The semi-personalized user cold start recommendation framework available for online requests in our production
environment, and described throughout Section 3. (1) Demographics and user-item interactions are concatenated, as described
in 3.2.2, to (2) predict a user embedding vector as in 3.2, from warm user embeddings described in 3.1.2 and 3.1.3. From the
estimated user preferences, the new user is assigned to a segment of warm users. (3) Combining the online predicted segment
with the pre-computed top items by segment, cold users bene￿t from semi-personalized recommendations.
[28]. Also, it equally considers di￿erent types of positive feedback;
in Section 3, we will furthermore consider negative feedback. Be-
sides, both warm and cold users’ embeddings are learned during
training, whereas our system will directly incorporate cold users
in an existing and ￿xed embedding space of warm users.
Recently, meta-learning based methods [43] have also been pro-
posed to solve the user cold start problem, with promising perfor-
mances [4, 24, 51]. Notably, optimization-based algorithms consider
each user as a learning task. From a set of global parameters en-
suring an initialization of the recommender system, other local
parameters are progressively updated while the user interacts with
items to capture his/her preferences. In particular, authors of [24]
introduce MeLU (for Meta-Learned User preference estimator), a neu-
ral network architecture following such a meta-learning paradigm
and learning preferences from the concatenation of user and item
information. When new users interact with some items, then local
parameters of the neural network are updated to re￿ne predictions
for these users. In the absence of usage data, users will still be
associated to an embedding vector and receive a recommended list
of items, thanks to global updates of all layers of MeLU.
Last, we point out that some research e￿orts also transposed re-
cent advances in graph representation learning [16] to recommender
systems [3, 47, 49, 50]. Especially, [50] proposed a Stacked and Re-
constructed Graph Convolutional Network (STAR-GCN) architecture,
extending ideas from [3] to tackle the user cold start problem from
bipartite user-item graphs. Although such a work deserves a men-
tion, we will however not include it in our baselines, as the model
returned memory errors in our experiments (with hundreds of thou-
sands to millions of users) and thus did not scale to Deezer data.
Nonetheless, we believe that future works on scalable graph models
for user cold start, e.g. by leveraging ideas from [8, 34, 35], could
de￿nitely lead to promising new methods, especially considering
the recent successes of scalable graph-based recommender systems
on large-scale services such as Alibaba [46] or Pinterest [49].
3
A SEMI-PERSONALIZED SYSTEM TO
ADDRESS USER COLD START ON DEEZER
In this section, we present the system deployed in 2020 on the global
music streaming app Deezer to address the user cold start problem,
as formulated in Section 2.1. The architecture of our framework
is summarized in Figure 1, and discussed thereafter. The proposed
solution is suitable for production use on an online service.
3.1
Two Latent Models to Represent Musical
Preferences of Warm Users
We recall that our objective is to e￿ectively incorporate, by the end
of their registration day, a set of cold users in an existing embedding
space trained on warm users. In the following, we introduce two
di￿erent strategies to learn such a space on Deezer data. Although
some technical details on computations are omitted for con￿den-
tiality reasons, some embedding vectors from both models will be
released with this paper (see Section 4). Moreover, experimental
results on both spaces will be reported in the next section.
3.1.1
UT-ALS Embeddings. Latent models for collaborative ￿lter-
ing can approximate a preference matrix between users and items
from the product of two low-rank matrices, respectively stacking up
latent vector representations, a.k.a. embedding vectors, of users and
items [20, 41]. At Deezer, we consider a user-track (UT) interaction
matrix summarizing interactions between millions of active users
and music tracks from the catalog. The a￿nity score between user 8
and music track 9, i.e. the entry (8, 9) of the matrix, is computed from
KDD ’21, August 14–18, 2021, Virtual Event, Singapore
L. Briand et al.
number 
of
 searches
...
...
stream song vector
country embedding
average
embedded song
streams
embedded artist
streams
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
stream artist vector
...
search song vector
average
...
embedded song
searched
average
age embedding
number
of
streams
Predicted user embeddings
...
user side information
interactions
same country warm
user embeddings
same age warm user
embeddings
...
...
...
average
...
user age
average
Figure 2: Prediction of user embeddings from heterogeneous data. Top left: embedding vectors of activated items in usage data,
including onboarding, are aggregated as described in 3.2.2. Top right: we enrich representations with demographic information.
Bottom: after pre-processing the dense input features vector, a deep neural network model, trained as in 3.2.3, predicts user
embedding vectors in either the UT-ALS embedding space (from 3.1.1) or the TT-SVD embedding space (from 3.1.2).
various signals, including the number of streams and the potential
addition of the music track (or the corresponding album or artist)
to a playlist of favorites. The ￿nal entry is re￿ned in accordance
with internal heuristic rules. Then, we rely on a weighted matrix
factorization, speci￿cally by using the alternating least squares (ALS)
method [21], to map both users and music tracks to a joint latent
space of dimension 3 = 256. These vector representations will be
referred to as UT-ALS embeddings in the remainder of this paper.
3.1.2
TT-SVD Embeddings. Models inspired from word2vec [29]
rely on the distributional hypothesis [33] to map items co-occurring
in similar contexts to geometrically close embedding vectors. Au-
thors of [25] show that word2vec with negative sampling implicitly
factorizes a shifted pointwise mutual information (PMI) matrix us-
ing singular value decomposition (SVD) [21]. In this paper, we also
consider a PMI matrix, based on the co-occurrences of music tracks
in diverse music collections on Deezer, such as music playlists.
Then, we factorize this track-track (TT) matrix using a distributed
implementation of SVD2, leading to embedding vectors of dimen-
sion 3 = 128 for each music track3. Finally, we derive embedding
vectors for warm users, by averaging music track vectors over their
listening history on Deezer. These vector representations, di￿erent
from UT-ALS embeddings, will be referred to as TT-SVD embeddings
in the remainder of this paper.
2https://github.com/criteo/Spark-RSVD
3Embedding dimensions of UT-ALS and TT-SVD have been optimized independently
for recommendation, and are therefore di￿erent (256 vs 128). The choice of SVD vs ALS
factorization is also driven by internal optimizations on Deezer data. In experiments
we will simply exploit these vectors, independently, for user cold start.
3.1.3
Warm User Segmentation. On top of UT-ALS or TT-SVD
user embeddings, our system also computes a segmentation of
warm users, by running a :-means algorithm, with : = 1 000 clus-
ters/segments, in the embedding space. Each user segment is rep-
resented by its centroid i.e. by the average of its user embedding
vectors. In production, a list of the most popular music items to
recommend among each warm user segment is also pre-computed.
3.2
Predicting the Preferences of Cold Users
In the following we present our model, illustrated in Figure 2, to
integrate cold users into these embedding spaces, and subsequently
predict their future musical preferences on Deezer.
3.2.1
Overall Strategy. Firstly, we gather data from various sources,
presented in 3.2.2 and referred to as input features. They can be col-
lected for warm users and (at least partially for) cold users. Then, we
train a neural network (3.2.3) to map input features of warm users to
their (either UT-ALS or TT-SVD) embedding vectors. Last, through
a forward pass on this trained neural network, we predict embed-
ding vectors for cold users from their input features. Cold users are
therefore integrated into the existing latent space alongside warm
users and each track of the catalog. This will permit computing
cold user-track similarities, and even similarities between cold and
warm users, which we leverage in 3.2.4 for clustering.
3.2.2
Input features. During registration, all users specify their
age and country of origin, which we include in input features. This
information is enriched with country embedding and age embedding
A Semi-Personalized System for User Cold Start Recommendation on Music Streaming Apps
KDD ’21, August 14–18, 2021, Virtual Event, Singapore
Figure 3: Overview of the onboarding process on Deezer.
vectors which, as illustrated in Figure 2, are the average of embed-
ding vectors of warm users from respectively the same country
and age class. As hybrid models mentioned in Section 2.2, we com-
plement this side information with data retrieved from user-item
interactions, limiting to interactions at registration day (if any).
These interactions include (positive or negative) explicit and implicit
signals, including streaming activity, searches, skips and likes. As
granularity of items is crucial in music [36], we also compute such
signals at the album, artist and playlist levels, deriving embedding
vectors for such music entities by averaging the relevant track
embeddings (e.g. by averaging the tracks of an album, or part of
the discography of an artist). Then, for each type of interaction
and music entity, embedding vectors are averaged, as illustrated in
Figure 2. We obtain ￿xed-size representations for both demograph-
ics and interactions, i.e. independent of the number of modalities
or interactions, which is crucial for scalability in a production en-
vironment. For some new users, some (or possibly all) types of
interactions at registration day may be missing; the corresponding
representations are replaced arbitrarily by null vectors. To avoid
such a situation, the Deezer app includes an onboarding process for
newly registered users, proposing them to add artists from various
music genres to their list of favorites, as illustrated in Figure 3.
3.2.3
Model training. Fixed-size representations of demographics
and interactions are concatenated to form a unique dense input
vector of dimension 5139 (when considering UT-ALS embeddings)
or 2579 (TT-SVD embeddings). It constitutes the input layer of a
feedforward neural network, with three hidden layers of dimensions
400, 300 and 200 respectively, and an output layer of dimension
3 = 256 (when considering UT-ALS embeddings) or 128 (TT-SVD
embedding). We use recti￿ed linear unit (ReLU) activations at each
layer except the output, followed by batch normalization [14]. We
train the model on warm users, by iteratively minimizing the mean
squared error between the predicted user embeddings and their
actual value in UT-ALS or TT-SVD spaces, by stochastic gradient
descent [14] with a learning rate of 0.0001, batch sizes of 512, and
100 (respectively 130) epochs for TT-SVD (resp. UT-ALS).
3.2.4
Semi-Personalization. Our model integrates cold users into
the existing embedding space alongside warm users and music
tracks. Therefore, one could provide fully personalized music rec-
ommendation to each of those cold users, by retrieving the most
similar tracks for each user via an exact or an approximate nearest
neighbors search and some similarity measure. However, as we will
empirically show in our experiments, such a strategy can still lead
to noisy results for users with very few to no usage data. As a
consequence, our system instead adopts a semi-personalized recom-
mendation strategy. On top of our neural network predictions, we
include cold users into the pre-computed warm user segmentation,
described in Section 3.1.3. Speci￿cally, each cold user is assigned to
the warm cluster whose centroid is the closest w.r.t. the predicted
embedding vector of this cold user. We subsequently recommend
the pre-computed most popular tracks among warm users from the
cluster. Our framework is summarized in Figure 1.
3.3
Model Deployment
This system is suitable for online production use on large-scale
apps. At Deezer, the real-time inference service to predict user em-
beddings is a Golang web server, deployed in a Kubernetes cluster.
The web service wraps the onnxruntime library4, a fast engine for
running ONNX machine learning models. It permits fast predictions
of cold users’ embeddings via forward passes on already trained
neural networks. Models are trained o￿ine using PyTorch, on an
NVIDIA GTX 1080 GPU and an Intel Xeon Gold 6134 CPU, and
then exported to ONNX format and stored on Hadoop. Embeddings
of music tracks (from which we also derive embeddings of artists,
albums or playlists) as well as warm segment centroids are exported
weekly in tables in a Cassandra cluster, exposed via a JSON REST
service. Embeddings and serialized models are weekly updated
to take into account changes in the catalog and preferences, and
weekly exported as well.
4
EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
In the following, we evaluate the performance and impact of our
system on Deezer data, through both o￿ine and online experiments.
4.1
O￿line Evaluation
4.1.1
Predicting Future Preferences of Cold Users: Evaluation Task
and Metrics. Our system permits recommending musical content
to cold users. Through experiments on an o￿ine dataset of Deezer
active users, described thereafter, we evaluate to which extent the
proposed recommendations at registration day would have matched
the actual musical preferences of a set of users on their ￿rst month
on the service. Speci￿cally, we compute the 50 most relevant music
tracks for each user of the dataset, from our model and registration
day’s input features (described in Section 3.2.2). We compare them to
the tracks listened by each user during their next 30 days on Deezer,
using three standard recommendation metrics: the precision, the
recall, as well as the normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG)
as a measure of ranking quality [36].
4.1.2
Dataset. For o￿ine experiments, we extracted a dataset of
100 000 fully anonymized Deezer users. Among them, 70 000 are
4https://www.onnxruntime.ai/
KDD ’21, August 14–18, 2021, Virtual Event, Singapore
L. Briand et al.
warm users. They are associated to demographic information (coun-
try and self-reported age), as well as their respective UT-ALS and
TT-SVD embedding vectors. These vectors correspond to those
actually computed by our latent collaborative ￿ltering models on
the Deezer production system on November 1st, 2020, from millions
of active warm users. Our dataset also includes the UT-ALS and
TT-SVD embedding representations of the 50 000 most popular
anonymized music tracks on Deezer.
The remaining 30 000 users are cold users, who registered on
Deezer on the ￿rst week of November 2020, and subsequently
listened to at least 50 music tracks on their ￿rst month on the service
(excluding registration day). They are split into a validation set and
a test set of respectively 20 000 and 10 000 users. For each cold user,
we collected demographic information as well as the list of artists
potentially selected during the onboarding session, and the lists
of available streams, skips, bans, searches, additions to favorites
relative to music tracks, artists, albums and playlists at registration
day only. 77% of cold users from this dataset streamed at least
once at registration day, whereas 95% of cold users ful￿lled one of
the aforementioned interactions. Thus, for the remaining 5%, only
demographic information is available at registration day. Last, the
dataset includes the tracks listened by cold users during their next
30 days on Deezer, among the 50 000 tracks.
Along with this paper, we publicly release5 this dataset, as well as
the code corresponding to our o￿ine experiments. Besides making
our results reproducible, it will publicly provide a relevant real-
world benchmark dataset to evaluate and compare future cold start
models on actual (albeit anonymized) usage data. We therefore hope
that this open-source release of industrial resources will favor and
bene￿t future research and applications on user cold start problems.
4.1.3
Models. We report results from two versions of our system
(one trained on the UT-ALS embeddings of the 70 000 warm users,
and one trained on their TT-SVD embeddings) on the task presented
in 4.1.1. For each embedding space, we simultaneously evaluate:
• the semi-personalized recommendations, which are actually
used in production at Deezer. In this case, the 50 recom-
mended tracks of each user will correspond to the 50 most
popular tracks of his/her user segment, as detailed in 3.2.4 ;
• the fully-personalized ones, which directly leverage the pre-
dicted embedding vectors of each cold user from the neural
network. In this case, we recommend, for each cold user, the
50 nearest neighbors music tracks w.r.t. his/her vector in the
embedding space, according to a cosine similarity.
Moreover, although the main objective of this applied paper is
to show the very practical impact of a deployed system and not to
chase the state of the art, we also report the performances of several
baseline methods as a point of comparison. Foremost, we consider
a popularity-based baseline. This chart-based method recommends
the most popular songs to cold users. Besides, to motivate the need
for a careful modeling of user cold start, we consider the Registration
Day Streams method, which includes cold users in the embedding
in a more straightforward way. It estimates a cold user’s embedding
vector by averaging embedding vectors of music tracks listened at
registration day (and relying on popularity in the absence of any
5Data and code are available on: https://github.com/deezer/semi_perso_user_cold_start
stream), then recommends 50 tracks to each cold user via a nearest
neighbors search. Moreover, a third ablation baseline, denoted Input
Features Clustering in the following, will consist in getting rid of
our neural network model and directly rely on the input features of
Section 3.2.2. This method will also cluster all users into segments
via a :-means, but from their stacked input features, i.e. the large
vector illustrated in Figure 2. Recommended tracks will correspond
to the 50 most popular among warm users of each cluster; as users
are no longer in the same space as tracks, we do not evaluate any
fully-personalized version of this baseline.
Last, we evaluate DropoutNet [44] and MeLU [24], two powerful
deep learning models from the recent literature, described in Sec-
tion 2. We selected these two methods as they are simultaneously
1) among the most promising approaches, to the best of our knowl-
edge, 2) scalable to large datasets, and 3) publicly available online6.
They process the same input features as our model, with the notable
exception that DropoutNet only processes positive user-track in-
teractions (i.e. not skips nor bans, representing approximately 12%
of all interactions in our dataset). We carefully tuned each model
using the validation set. For each model, we simultaneously evalu-
ate fully-personalized recommendations where, as for our system,
we recommend to each cold user his/her 50 most similar music
tracks, as well as semi-personalized recommendations leveraging a
warm user segmentation similar to ours. We consider two variants
of each model from the last two paragraphs, respectively trained
on UT-ALS and TT-SVD embeddings.
4.1.4
Results. Table 1 reports performance scores for all models
on the UT-ALS and TT-SVD embeddings, along with standard devi-
ations over ten iterations. As the Popularity baseline is independent
from embedding vectors, it obtains the same scores for the two em-
beddings. In both settings, Popularity is the worst method, although
performances are still fairly good for such a simple strategy.
We ￿rst focus on TT-SVD embeddings. The Registration Day
Streams baseline hardly beats Popularity for these embeddings,
which emphasizes the limits of a direct use of sparse usage data in
cold start settings. On the contrary, our proposed semi-personalized
system provides signi￿cant improvements (e.g. a +14.86 NDCG
points increase w.r.t. Registration Day Streams), and even reaches
competitive results w.r.t. DropoutNet and MeLU. Overall, semi-
personalized methods outperform their fully-personalized variants
(e.g. a +13.17 precision points increase for Deezer Semi-Pers. vs
Deezer Full-Pers.). This con￿rms the empirical relevance of our
user segmentation strategy, and that, while the studied methods
could provide fully personalized recommendations to cold users,
this strategy can lead to noisier results on real-world applications
such as ours. Last, our system provides better results than a direct
use of the input features vector (Input Features Clustering baseline),
which con￿rms the relevance of our modeling step on top of this
vector. We considered replacing our 3-layer neural network by
alternative architectures between Input Features Clustering and
Deezer Semi-Pers., notably by a 1-layer neural network i.e. a simpler
linear regression model, but did not reach comparable results.
Regarding the UT-ALS embeddings, most conclusions are consis-
tent w.r.t. TT-SVD. Deezer Semi-Pers. reaches quite comparable or
6Public implementations are available on https://github.com/layer6ai-labs/DropoutNet
and https://github.com/hoyeoplee/MeLU respectively.
A Semi-Personalized System for User Cold Start Recommendation on Music Streaming Apps
KDD ’21, August 14–18, 2021, Virtual Event, Singapore
Table 1: O￿line prediction of future musical preferences of Deezer cold users.
Methods
TT-SVD Embeddings
UT-ALS Embeddings
Precision@50 (in %)
Recall@50 (in %)
NDCG@50 (in %)
Precision@50 (in %)
Recall@50 (in %)
NDCG@50 (in %)
Popularity
8.92 ± 0.21
3.01 ± 0.08
9.72 ± 0.20
8.92 ± 0.21
3.01 ± 0.08
9.72 ± 0.20
Registration Day Streams
9.30 ± 0.22
3.48 ± 0.06
9.73 ± 0.23
16.88 ± 0.46
5.99 ± 0.11
17.72 ± 0.43
Input Features Clustering
8.84 ± 0.22
2.97 ± 0.08
9.75 ± 0.23
8.85 ± 0.22
2.98 ± 0.08
9.75 ± 0.22
DropoutNet Full-Pers.
10.04 ± 0.27
3.75 ± 0.11
10.46 ± 0.29
16.30 ± 0.50
5.77 ± 0.50
17.62 ± 0.54
DropoutNet Semi-Pers.
20.85 ± 0.35
7.55 ± 0.12
22.61 ± 0.36
19.83 ± 0.32
6.93 ± 0.16
21.55 ± 0.44
MeLU Full-Pers.
15.00 ± 0.40
5.12 ± 0.17
16.79 ± 0.45
13.92 ± 0.36
4.71 ± 0.12
15.49 ± 0.39
MeLU Semi-Pers.
19.66 ± 0.36
6.87 ± 0.15
21.63 ± 0.40
19.35 ± 0.43
6.71 ± 0.14
21.33 ± 0.45
Deezer Full-Pers. (ours)
9.58 ± 0.18
3.53 ± 0.03
9.77 ± 0.17
18.50 ± 0.43
6.63 ± 0.10
20.22 ± 0.41
Deezer Semi-Pers. (ours)
22.75 ± 0.32
8.26 ± 0.15
24.59 ± 0.30
19.00 ± 0.42
6.93 ± 0.10
20.38 ± 0.45
better results w.r.t. alternatives. Among the key di￿erences, we high-
light that, while Deezer, DropoutNet and MeLU Semi-Pers are overper-
forming, the fully-personalized Registration Day Streams, Dropout-
Net Full-Pers and Deezer Full-Pers obtain signi￿cantly stronger re-
sults than on TT-SVD embeddings (e.g. a 18.50% precision score
for Deezer Full-Pers. on UT-ALS, vs 9.58% on TT-SVD). UT-ALS em-
beddings are constructed from a user-item interaction matrix, an
approach appearing as better suited for nearest neighbors search.
To conclude on Table 1, we emphasize that, while all scores might
seem relatively low, they are actually encouraging considering the
intrinsic complexity of the evaluation task (predicting a few listened
tracks, among 50 000). Overall, the TT-SVD version of Deezer Semi-
Pers reaches the best results. We note that the choice of @50 metrics
is not restrictive. We reached consistent model rankings for @25
and @100 scores; the number of items to recommend will be a
selectable parameter in our public implementation.
To go further, Figure 4 reports the mean precision@50 scores
obtained by our semi-personalized system trained on TT-SVD em-
beddings, depending on available user-item interactions at regis-
tration day. We observe that our model returns better results for
users who streamed (positive signal) or skipped (negative signal)
more tracks at registration day. Liking at least three artists during
the onboarding session also improves recommendations, which
tends to con￿rm the relevance of this strategy. On the contrary, our
experiments show that users without any interaction (5% of them,
for which only demographics are available) gets a lower average
precision@50 score of 17.74%, 5.01 points below the global average.
Last, Figure 5 reports the popularity distribution of recommended
tracks from our system, trained on TT-SVD embeddings and for
users from the top 5 countries on Deezer. We aim at assessing
whether better performance inevitably means recommending pop-
ular tracks, which is referred to as the popularity bias [32]. Our
semi-personalized system stands out from the popularity baseline,
and mainly recommends tracks among the 5 000 most popular in
the dataset, out of 50 000. The fully-personalized variant of our sys-
tem permits recommending even less mainstream tracks, but, as we
showed, this might come at the price of noisier recommendations.
4.2
Online Evaluation
4.2.1
Online Personalization. In addition to these experiments on
data extracted from Deezer, online tests were run to check whether
Figure 4: Precision@50 scores of Deezer Semi-Pers. depend-
ing on the number of artists liked during the onboarding
session, of streams, and of skips at registration day.
Figure 5: Distribution of music tracks recommended to cold
users, by popularity rank on Deezer.
our conclusions would hold on the actual Deezer app. On our home-
page, we do not directly recommend music tracks, as in our o￿ine
experimental setting, but instead musical collections such as albums
and music playlists. As a consequence, our online tests will rather
consist in recommending playlists to cold users. The embedding vec-
tors of these playlists are computed from averages of the TT-SVD
embeddings of music tracks from each playlist and from inter-
nal heuristics. More precisely, Deezer displays 12 recommended
KDD ’21, August 14–18, 2021, Virtual Event, Singapore
L. Briand et al.
Figure 6: Personalized carousels on the Deezer app.
playlists to each user through carousels [2], that are ranked and swi-
peable lists of playlists cards, as illustrated in Figure 6. Carousels are
updated on a daily basis on the app7. All playlists were created by
professional curators from Deezer, with the purpose of complying
with a speci￿c music genre, cultural area or mood.
4.2.2
Online A/B Test Results. A large-scale A/B test has been run
for a month on Deezer in 2020, on new cold users registering during
this period. Due to industrial constraints, testing all model variants
in production was impossible. Also, for con￿dentiality reasons, we
do not report the exact number of users involved in each cohort,
and results are expressed in relative terms w.r.t. the performance of
Deezer Default, a previous production system estimating cold user
embeddings by countries and from internal heuristics. We observe
in Figure 7 that our new (TT-SVD-based) semi-personalized system
leads to signi￿cant improvements of the relative display-to-stream
and display-to-favorite rates, i.e. it permits selecting playlists on
which cold users are more likely to click on and then to stream
the underlying content or add it to their list of favorite content.
Such results validate the relevance of our proposed system, and
emphasize its practical impact on industrial-scale applications in a
global music streaming app.
4.2.3
Towards more interpretable recommendations. We underline
that our semi-personalized system also enables us to provide in-
terpretable recommendations on Deezer. Indeed, carousel person-
alization relies on user embedding vectors that, for cold users,
are linked to centroids of warm user segments. Therefore, recom-
mended playlists can be described via the characteristics of these
segments, such as the most common country or age class of warm
users from each segment, or the most common music genres among
their favorite artists. Table 2 reports a few concrete examples of
user segment descriptions, along with music playlists that were
actually recommended to cold users from these segments on the
Deezer app. Providing interpretable recommendations is often de-
sirable for industrial applications, both for data scientists dealing
7We provide a more detailed description to some algorithms behind dynamic carousel
personalization for warm Deezer users in [2].
Figure 7: Online A/B test: relative display-to-stream and
display-to-favorites rates w.r.t. internal baseline. Di￿erences
are statistically signi￿cant at the 1% level (p-value <0.01).
Table 2: Examples of user segments, described by most com-
mon country, age class and music genres among favorite
tracks, together with online recommended playlists.
Segment
Recommended Playlists on Deezer
Description
France
18-24 y.o.
Rap, Hip-Hop
Brazil
25-34 y.o.
Sertanejo
Germany
35-49 y.o.
Schlager, Pop
with opaque model predictions, and for users as a way to improve
their satisfaction and trust in the system [1].
5
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented the semi-personalized system recently
deployed in production at Deezer to address the challenging user
cold start problem. We demonstrated the tangible impact of this
system, through both o￿ine and online experiments on music rec-
ommendation tasks. Moreover, although our main focus was on
practical impact and not on chasing the state of the art, we also
showed that our approach is competitive w.r.t. some powerful user
cold start models from the recent scienti￿c literature. Last, along
with this paper we publicly release our code, as well as the dataset
used in our o￿ine experiments, providing information on 100 000
A Semi-Personalized System for User Cold Start Recommendation on Music Streaming Apps
KDD ’21, August 14–18, 2021, Virtual Event, Singapore
anonymized users and their interactions with the Deezer catalog.
We hope that this open-source release of industrial resources will
enable future research on user cold start recommendation. For in-
stance, in this paper we assumed that, while the number of users
increases over time, the musical catalog remains ￿xed, which is a
limit, currently addressed at Deezer via internal heuristics. Future
studies on a more e￿ective incorporation of new releases in our
semi-personalized system would decidedly improve its empirical
e￿ectiveness. Besides, future studies could also consider di￿erent
embedding sizes for users and items [17], or the inclusion of tem-
poral and contextual information in our neural network. Last, as
we rely on user segments, we also believe that future work on a
more e￿ective user clustering, e.g. by leveraging graph-based meth-
ods, could strengthen our system and permit providing even more
re￿ned recommendations to new users.
REFERENCES
[1] Darius Afchar and Romain Hennequin. 2020. Making Neural Networks Inter-
pretable with Attribution: Application to Implicit Signals Prediction. In Fourteenth
ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 220–229.
[2] Walid Bendada, Guillaume Salha, and Théo Bontempelli. 2020. Carousel Person-
alization in Music Streaming Apps with Contextual Bandits. In Fourteenth ACM
Conference on Recommender Systems. 420–425.
[3] Rianne Van Den Berg, Thomas Kipf, and Max Welling. 2017. Graph Convolutional
Matrix Completion. KDD Deep Learning Day (2017).
[4] Homanga Bharadhwaj. 2019. Meta-Learning for User Cold-Start Recommenda-
tion. In 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks. IEEE, 1–8.
[5] Jesús Bobadilla, Fernando Ortega, Antonio Hernando, and Jesús Bernal. 2012. A
Collaborative Filtering Approach to Mitigate the New User Cold Start Problem.
Knowledge-Based Systems 26 (2012), 225–238.
[6] Jesús Bobadilla, Fernando Ortega, Antonio Hernando, and Abraham Gutiérrez.
2013. Recommender Systems Survey. Knowledge-Based Sys. 46 (2013), 109–132.
[7] Ke Yin Cao, Yu Liu, and Hua Xin Zhang. 2020. Improving the Cold Start Problem
in Music Recommender Systems. In J. of Physics: Conf. Series, Vol. 1651. 012–067.
[8] Jie Chen, Tengfei Ma, and Cao Xiao. 2018. FastGCN: Fast Learning with Graph
Convolutional Networks via Importance Sampling. In ICLR.
[9] Paul Covington, Jay Adams, and Emre Sargin. 2016. Deep Neural Networks
for Youtube Recommendations. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on
Recommender Systems. 191–198.
[10] Elena V. Epure, Guillaume Salha, and Romain Hennequin. 2020. Multilingual
Music Genre Embeddings for E￿ective Cross-Lingual Music Item Annotation. In
31st International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference.
[11] Crícia Z Felício, Klérisson VR Paixão, Celia AZ Barcelos, and Philippe Preux. 2017.
A Multi-Armed Bandit Model Selection for Cold-Start User Recommendation. In
25th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization. 32–40.
[12] Ignacio Fernández-Tobías, Matthias Braunhofer, Mehdi Elahi, Francesco Ricci,
and Iván Cantador. 2016. Alleviating the New User Problem in Collaborative
Filtering by Exploiting Personality Information. User Modeling and User-Adapted
Interaction 26, 2 (2016), 221–255.
[13] Carlos A Gomez-Uribe and Neil Hunt. 2015. The Net￿ix Recommender System:
Algorithms, Business Value, and Innovation. ACM Transactions on Management
Information Systems 6, 4 (2015), 1–19.
[14] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. 2016. Deep Learning. MIT.
[15] Jyotirmoy Gope and Sanjay Kumar Jain. 2017. A Survey on Solving Cold Start
Problem in Recommender Systems. In 2017 International Conference on Computing,
Communication and Automation (ICCCA). IEEE, 133–138.
[16] William L. Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Representation Learning
on Graphs: Methods and Applications. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin (2017).
[17] Xiangnan He, Lizi Liao, Hanwang Zhang, Liqiang Nie, Xia Hu, and Tat-Seng
Chua. 2017. Neural Collaborative Filtering. In WWW. 173–182.
[18] Xiangnan He, Hanwang Zhang, Min-Yen Kan, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2016. Fast
Matrix Factorization for Online Recommendation with Implicit Feedback. In 39th
Int. ACM SIGIR conf. on Research and Development in Information Retrieval.
[19] Kurt Jacobson, Vidhya Murali, Edward Newett, Brian Whitman, and Romain Yon.
2016. Music Personalization at Spotify. In RecSys.
[20] Yehuda Koren and Robert Bell. 2015. Advances in Collaborative Filtering. Rec-
ommender Systems Handbook (2015), 77–118.
[21] Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and Chris Volinsky. 2009. Matrix Factorization Tech-
niques for Recommender Systems. Computer 42, 8 (2009), 30–37.
[22] Maciej Kula. 2015. Metadata Embeddings for User and Item Cold-Start Recom-
mendations. arXiv:1507.08439 (2015).
[23] Xuan Nhat Lam, Thuc Vu, Trong Duc Le, and Anh Duc Duong. 2008. Addressing
Cold-Start Problem in Recommendation Systems. In International Conference on
Ubiquitous Information Management and Communication. 208–211.
[24] Hoyeop Lee, Jinbae Im, Seongwon Jang, Hyunsouk Cho, and Sehee Chung. 2019.
MeLU: Meta-Learned User Preference Estimator for Cold-Start Recommendation.
In 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining.
[25] Omer Levy and Yoav Goldberg. 2014. Neural Word Embedding as Implicit Matrix
Factorization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27 (2014).
[26] Blerina Lika, Kostas Kolomvatsos, and Stathes Hadjiefthymiades. 2014. Facing the
Cold Start Problem in Recommender Systems. Expert Systems with Applications
41, 4 (2014), 2065–2073.
[27] Jovian Lin, Kazunari Sugiyama, Min-Yen Kan, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2013. Address-
ing Cold-Start in App Recommendation: Latent User Models Constructed from
Twitter Followers. In Proceedings of the 36th international ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 283–292.
[28] Roderick JA Little and Donald B Rubin. 2019. Statistical Analysis with Missing
Data. Vol. 793. John Wiley & Sons.
[29] Tomáš Mikolov, Édouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, Christian Puhrsch, and Ar-
mand Joulin. 2018. Advances in Pre-Training Distributed Word Representations.
In International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 20