CB2CF: A Neural Multiview Content-to-Collaborative Filtering 
Model for Completely Cold Item Recommendations
 
 
ABSTRACT 
In Recommender Systems research, algorithms are often 
characterized as either Collaborative Filtering (CF) or Content 
Based (CB). CF algorithms are trained using a dataset of user 
preferences while CB algorithms are typically based on item 
profiles. These approaches harness different data sources and 
therefore the resulting recommended items are generally very 
different. This paper presents the CB2CF, a deep neural multiview 
model that serves as a bridge from items content into their CF 
representations. CB2CF is a “real-world” algorithm designed for 
Microsoft Store services that handle around a billion users 
worldwide. CB2CF is demonstrated on movies and apps 
recommendations, where it is shown to outperform an alternative 
CB model on completely cold items. 
KEYWORDS 
Cold item recommendations, multiview representation learning, 
deep learning, recommender systems, item recommendation, 
collaborative filtering, content based filtering, cold start, natural 
language understading 
ACM Reference format: 
Oren Barkan, Noam Koenigstein, Eylon Yogev and Ori Katz. 2019. 
CB2CF: A Neural Multiview Content-to-Collaborative Filtering Model for 
Completely Cold Item Recommendations. In Proceedings of Recsys’19. 
ACM, Copenhagen, Denmark. https://doi.org/10.1145/3298689.3347038 
1. Introduction 
Windows Store is powered by Microsoft’s recommendations 
services that cater around 1 billion users worldwide (including MS 
store and Xbox). The store features many different types of 
recommendation scenarios, and the “similar items list” (titled 
“People Also Like”) is a principal driver of user engagement and 
sales. When a new (cold) item is introduced, we wish to be able to 
find its most similar items based on the CB data alone. Hence, this 
paper presents the CB2CF algorithm for learning similar item 
relations. CB2CF aims to produce item similarities from content 
alone where supervision for training the model comes from an 
external CF model.  
    In Recommender Systems research, CF models are commonly 
used for a variety of personalization tasks [9–11]. A common 
approach in CF is to learn a low-dimensional latent space that 
captures the user’s preference patterns or “taste”. For example, 
Matrix Factorization (MF) models [8, 12, 44] are usually used to 
map users and items into a dense manifold using a dataset of usage 
patterns or explicit ratings. An alternative to the CF approach is the 
Content Based (CB) approach which uses item profiles such as 
metadata and item descriptions, etc. CF approaches are generally 
accepted to be more accurate than CB approaches as they capture 
specific user taste [32].     
    CB2CF enables the embedding of completely cold items (items 
for which usage patterns do not exist) in the CF space. This 
capability is crucial in real world recommendation systems in 
which new items are being added to the catalog on a daily basis, 
with zero usage information. Typically, these new items are 
associated with CB profiles that are obtained from a mix of 
categorical, continuous and unstructured textual data. For example, 
the CB data of a movie contains tags (e.g. genres), numeric values 
(release year) and textual description (plot). 
    CB2CF is trained using a set of items for which both CB and CF 
data exist. The CB representation of an item consists of multiple 
CB sources and the CF item vectors are produced by the Bayesian 
Personalized Ranking (BPR) [12] algorithm. Then, CB2CF learns 
a multiview mapping from the CB item representation (the input) 
to its corresponding CF item vector (output).  
    CB2CF utilizes a convolutional neural network (CNN) on top of 
word2vec [5] representation to learn a mapping from the textual 
description of items (movie plots or app descriptions) to their CF 
item vectors produced by BPR. Beyond the textual descriptions, the 
model can be enhanced by adding different types of structured 
metadata as input. This metadata, when used along with the textual 
information, can be used to improve the overall accuracy of the 
CB2CF model. 
   We note that we chose to use the highly popular BPR model for 
better reproducibility. However, the choice of supervision is 
configurable and can be replaced by a variety of other CF methods 
[8]. Similarly, our choice of CNN [7] for processing the CB data 
can be replaced with any other model such as in [36, 37]. The 
primary emphasis of this paper is on investigating the connection 
between items’ CB and their CF representations. CB2CF does not 
allude to compete with existing CF or hybrid models. 
    The contribution of this work is twofold: First, we introduce the 
CB2CF model for bridging the gap between items’ CB profiles and 
their CF representations. This is particularly useful for 
recommending new items for which usage data is not available 
(cold-start). We show that CB2CF, which is supervised by CF 
information, produces significantly better results than classical CB 
models that use the same CB data. Secondly, we present a 
multiview architecture that supports a combination of categorical, 
continuous and unstructured data as inputs. Finally, we investigate 
the contribution of each content information source with respect to 
the CF prediction task and show their ability to reveal interesting 
patterns that exist in CF datasets. This last trait, although not the 
main focus of this paper, has the potential to be further harnessed 
to improve recommender systems expandability.  
2. Related Work 
Deep learning models are being applied in a growing number of 
machine 
learning 
applications. 
Considerable 
technological 
advancements have been achieved in the fields of computer vision 
  
Oren Barkan 
Microsoft, Israel 
Noam Koenigstein 
Microsoft, Israel 
Tel Aviv University, Israel 
 
Eylon Yogev 
Microsoft, Israel 
Ori Katz 
Microsoft, Israel 
Technion, Israel 
 
2
[1] and speech recognition [2]. In Natural Language Processing 
(NLP), deep learning methods have been mostly focused on 
learning word vector representations [3-6,30]. Specifically, Skip-
Gram with Negative Sampling (SGNS) [5], known also as 
word2vec, has drawn much attention for its versatile uses in several 
linguistic tasks. 
    Word2vec maps a sparse 1-of-V encoding (where V is the size 
of the vocabulary) into a dense low-dimensional latent space which 
encodes semantic information. The resulting word representations 
span a manifold in which semantically related words are close to 
each other. A recent work by Kim [7] has further enhanced this 
approach by applying a CNN on top of the latent word 
representations to glean more information from unstructured 
textual data.  
    The first part of our model starts from a similar architecture: 
First, a word2vec model is established in order to map words taken 
from the item descriptions into a latent semantic manifold. Then, a 
CNN model is placed in cascade in order to utilize the semantic 
information for predicting the CF representation of the items. 
Therefore, the model in this paper serves as a mapping between the 
content profiles of items and their CF representations.  
    Many attempts have been taken to leverage multiple views for 
representation learning [25]-[28]. In the context of Recommender 
Systems, Wang et al. [20] proposed a hierarchical Bayesian model 
for learning a joint representation for content information and 
collaborative filtering ratings. Djuric et al. [21] introduced 
hierarchical neural language models for joint representation of 
streaming documents and their content with application to 
personalized recommendations. Xiao and Quan [22] suggested a 
hybrid recommendation algorithm based on collaborative filtering 
and word2vec, where recommendations scores are computed by a 
weighted combination of CF and CB scores. Other hybrid 
recommender systems are introduced in [38]-[40]. 
    This paper differs from the aforementioned works by several 
aspects: First, we focus on the scenario of completely cold items, 
namely items for which CF information is completely unavailable. 
For such items, a joint representation cannot be inferred, and 
recommendations are restricted solely to CB data. Hence, CB2CF 
is trained to infer the CF view of items directly from their CB view. 
Second, CB2CF introduces a flexible model architecture to support 
a combination of various input types simultaneously. Third, 
CB2CF is tasked with learning the CF representation of items only 
and does not attempt at learning user representations. 
    Arguably, the most similar previous work is [35], where the 
authors proposed to learn the song representations using their audio 
tracks alone. Different from [35], we present a multiview model 
that supports a variety of different input types. A direct comparison 
with [35] is redundant: Since the models are based on completely 
different CB inputs, a comparison would be informative only to the 
level of which the CB inputs are useful with respect to the task at 
hand. We do however provide an evaluation for CB2CF that is far 
more extensive than [35]. We cover two different domains (movies 
and apps) and an analysis of the contribution of each information 
source (view). 
3. The CB2CF Model 
Next, we provide a detailed description of the proposed CB2CF 
model. Recall that our task is to predict the CF representation for 
each item from its content (textual description / metadata). This 
work focuses on inferring item relations from implicit feedback 
only [12]. Given a finite set of items  = {}
	
, users 
 = {}

 
and a user-item matrix  ∈{0,1}×	, we first employ BPR [12] to 
produce a mapping :  →ℝ from an item  to its 
corresponding CF vector . Note that we discard the user vectors 
obtained by the application of BPR to , as we are interested in the 
item vectors only. 
    The CB representation for an item  is obtained by using 
different mappings for different information sources. For the 
textual descriptions, we denote a mapping :  →ℝ ×! from 
an item to a matrix that consists of " rows, where each row is a #-
dimensional word vector obtained by word2vec [5]. This matrix 
corresponds to the first " words in the textual description of the 
item. If the number of words is less thanl , we pad the matrix with 
zero vectors.  is used to generate the input for the CNN-based 
text component. 
   The second mapping for textual data maps an item to its bag of 
words (BOW) representation denoted by 
:
[0,1]b
BOW
M
I →
. This 
mapping is obtained by first applying k-means clustering on the 
word2vec representations of the entire vocabulary. We denote the 
number of clusters by b. Then, given the item’s description text, 
soft alignment is applied between each word vector in the text and 
the b centroids. The result is a histogram vector, which is then 
normalized into probabilities to form the BOW representations. 
This approach is inspired by prominent BOW models in computer 
vision [15] (an alternative is using TFIDF [16], however, in our 
initial experiments the BOW approach outperformed TFIDF). 
    For CB information in the form of tags / categories, we define a 
mapping $%&':  →{0,1}(  from an item to a binary vector, where 
) is the size of available tags. Each entry in the binary vector 
indicates whether the tag is associated to the item or not. 
    The last mapping we apply is used for numerical inputs and 
denoted by !:  →ℝ*. In this work, the numeric feature is a 
movie’s release year solely. Therefore, in this case ! reduces 
to !:  →ℕ. 
    In order to harness the different information sources, we utilize 
a neural multiview regression model consisting of three distinct 
types of components corresponding to each type of information 
source: textual, tags and numeric information. In what follows, we 
describe this architecture in detail. 
3.1 Text Components 
The text components are designed to receive raw text as input and 
output a fixed size vector. In this work, we implement two different 
types of text components: dubbed ‘CNN’ and ‘BOW’ (marked red 
in Fig. 1). The CNN approach follows Kim’s ‘CNN non-static’ 
model from [7]. As explained earlier, using , we map the 
sequence of words in the textual input to a matrix which serves as 
the input to a CNN network. An illustration of this approach (taken 
from [7]) appears in Fig. 1(d). We note that the backpropagation 
process continues through the CNN onto the initial word2vec 
representations allowing the word embedding to freely adjust with 
respect to the CF prediction task at hand. Hence, the initial mapping 
 is fine-tuned throughout the training process. 
    Our CNN consists of a single 1D convolutional layer with a filter 
length of 3 and L2 regularization. This is followed by a global max 
pooling layer (convolution and pooling are applied over the time 
axis) and an additional fully connected (FC) layer. In contrast to 
[7], we did not apply parallel convolutional layers with different 
filter lengths. We did experiment with multiple filter lengths (2-12), 
but these attempts failed to materialize into any gains with respect 
to our objective. A similar observation was also made in [31]. 
   We applied a random dropout of words in front of the CNN. This 
technique 
was 
instrumental 
in 
improving 
the 
model’s 
generalization capability and avoiding overfitting. The probability 
for dropping words can be either fixed or proportional to the words’ 
frequency. We found that both methods yield similar results and 
therefore resulted to using a fixed dropping probability of 0.2. 
 
    We considered several additional variants of CNN-based models 
as in [7]: (1) the ‘CNN random’ model learns the word 
representation  from scratch by using random initialization of 
the word vectors; (2) the ‘CNN static’ model that keeps the 
word2vec representation  fixed during the entire training 
process; (3) the ‘CNN multichannel’ model, which is a combination 
of both the ‘non-static’ and ‘static’ models. However, the ‘CNN 
non-static’ variant outperformed all the rest. In the remainder of 
this paper, we refer to this variant as our CNN component. 
    Our second approach for utilizing textual information is based 
on BOW on top of the word2vec representations. The BOW 
representation is computed by ,-. and is fed into a neural 
network with two FC layers and dropout in between. The BOW 
network architecture is presented in Fig. 1(c). 
3.2 Tags Components 
Beyond the textual information, it might be useful to utilize tags 
metadata which are associated with each item. The tags network 
consists of a binary input layer in the dimension of number of tags 
followed by a single FC hidden layer with L2 regularization on its 
weights. No further improvement was gained by including 
additional layers.  The input for the tags component is given by 
$%&'. The tags component is illustrated in Fig 1(a). 
    In the movies examples, we used different tags components for 
different types of metadata: genres, actors, directors and language 
tags. The hidden layer dimension is determined for each component 
according to the number of tags and their available combinations. 
For example, the actors component might be assigned with a higher 
output dimension than the language component. This is due to the 
fact that the number of actors is much larger than the number of 
languages. Moreover, movies usually contain multiple actors, but a 
single language. 
3.3 Numeric Components 
Numeric components are designed to handle numeric structured 
data represented as continuous feature vectors. In this work, the 
only numeric values available were the movies’ release year. 
Therefore, the numeric component was simply chosen to be a 
network with a single input neuron (Fig. 1(b)). This input is given 
by!. 
3.4 The Combiner Component 
The combiner component aims at combining multiple outputs from 
different components in order to predict into the CF space. The 
combiner component (illustrated in Fig. 1(e)) consists of multiple 
input layers that are fully connected to a hidden layer with L2 
regularization. Hence, the combiner concatenates all outputs from 
previous layers to form a single layer that is followed by a final FC 
output layer in the same dimension of the CF space. 
3.5 The Full CB2CF Model 
The CB2CF model is illustrated in Fig. 2. In accordance with Fig. 
1, tags, text and numeric components are colored in blue, red and 
green respectively. The combiner component is colored in yellow. 
Fig. 2 exemplifies the application of the presented model for the 
movie similarity task, specifically for the ‘Pulp Fiction’ movie. 
Genres, actors, directors and languages are modeled as tags 
components, the movie plot summary is modeled as a text 
component. In this implementation, the text component can be 
either CNN or BOW network. The movie’s release year is modeled 
as a numeric component. All of the components’ outputs are then 
fed into the combiner component that outputs the predicted CF 
vector. The loss function we use to train the model is the Mean 
Square Error (MSE), which is a common choice for regression 
tasks. ReLU [1] activations were found to outperform other 
activation functions such as in [43] and are used in between model 
layers. In inference phase, the affinity between items is computed 
via the cosine similarity of their respective vectors. 
    It is important to emphasize that the proposed CB2CF model is 
extremely flexible in the sense that each component can be easily 
disconnected from the combiner and the extension for additional 
information sources is straightforward. For example, we can add 
the countries where the movie was filmed and the movie duration 
as additional tags and numeric components, respectively. In 
addition, other advanced NLP models such as in [36], [37] can be 
used as text components, however we leave these models for future 
investigation. Finally, the exact hyperparameters configuration is 
detailed in Section 4.3. 
4. Experimental Setup and Results 
The quantitative results in this paper are obtained by 10-fold cross 
validation. We supplement these quantitative results with 
qualitative results to gain a better “feel” of the model. Recall that 
our goal is to predict for each item its CF vector from its CB profile. 
Hence, the CF representation is considered as the ground truth 
when training the CB2CF model. Next, we describe in detail the 
datasets, evaluated systems, parameter configurations, evaluation 
measures and present results. 
4.1 Datasets and Data Preparation 
In this section, we present two experiments: The first experiment 
provides an ablation study of the CB2CF model. The second 
experiment provides a comparison between CB2CF and other 
existing methods on completely cold item recommendations.  
4.1.1 Word2vec dataset 
We used a subset of the dataset from [14] in order to establish a 
word2vec model. Specifically, we kept only the top 50K most 
frequent words. We also mapped all numbers to the digit 9 and 
removed punctuation characters. Then, we randomly sampled 9.2M 
sentences that form a total text length of 217M words for training 
the word2vec model [5]. These word embeddings are used in the 
text components. 
4.1.2 Movies dataset 
The movies dataset is publicly available and contains both CF and 
CB data for movies. The CF data is based on the MovieLens dataset 
[18] containing 22,884,377 ratings collected during 1995-2016 
from 247,753 users that watched 34,208 movies. The movies are 
rated using a 5-star scale with half-star increments (0.5 - 5.0). From 
each user’s rating list, we consider all the movies with ratings above 
3.5 as a set of co-occurring movies. This results in 173,266 users 
(sets) that contain 11,108 unique items (movies) as the effective 
training data for learning the BPR model [12]. 
    For each movie, we collected metadata from IMDB [33]. Three 
types of information sources are collected: movie plot (given as raw 
text), genres / actors / directors / languages (given as tags) and 
release year (given as a natural number). In the metadata tags, we 
filtered tags that with less than 5 occurrences resulting in a 
remainder of 23 genres, 1526 actors, 470 directors and 72 
languages. 
   We created movie CB profiles as follows: First, we represented 
each movie’s plot summary by taking the first 500 words with 
word2vec mapping. We used zero padding for the plot descriptions 
shorter than 500 words. Then, the metadata fields from above were 
added to the movie profiles. Note that some of the movies had 
missing information. In this case, we set the plot or the missing tags 
to a special word / tag ‘n/a’. Missing values for the release year are 
set to the mean year of all movies (1993).  
 
4
4.1.3 Windows apps dataset 
The second dataset is a propriety dataset containing CF and CB data 
for apps from the Microsoft Windows Store. We generated CF 
profiles for the items using a dataset of users activity containing 5M 
user sessions. Each user session contains a list of items that were 
clicked by the same user in the same activity session. This dataset 
consists of 33K unique items (apps) which were used to procure the 
BPR model of representative CF vectors. 
    For each app, we created textual profiles based on the app 
description in the same manner as we did with the movies data (first 
500 words that have word2vec representation are saved for each 
app as its textual description). In this case, no further metadata was 
used beyond the textual descriptions. 
4.1.4 Data preparation 
Since we focus on item recommendations, for each user, we 
consider each pair of consecutive items /0, 12 as a positive example, 
 
Figure 1. The CB2CF components: Input, hidden and output layers are marked ‘x’, ‘h’ and ‘y’, respectively. Note that each layer may 
contain different number of neurons. Black arrows symbol FC connections. (a) Tags components (Section 3.2). (b) The numeric 
component (Section 3.3). (c) The BOW component (Section 3.1) (d) The CNN component (Section 3.1) (e) The combiner component 
(Section 3.4) receives the outputs from several different components and fully connects them to a hidden layer ‘h’ that is followed by 
the output layer ‘y’. The dimension of the output layer is the same as the dimension of the CF space 3. 
Genres
(Tags)
Actors
(Tags)
Directors
(Tags)
Languages
(Tags)
Plot
(Text)
Year
(Numeric)
John Travolta 
Uma Thurman 
Samuel L. Jackson
Crime
Drama
Two hitmen who 
are out to retrieve a 
suitcase stolen from 
their employer …
Quentin Tarantino
English
1994
Combiner
MSE 
loss
‘Pulp Fiction’ 
CF vector
Figure 2. CB2CF model illustration for the movie similarity task. The figure shows an example for the movie ‘Pulp Fiction’. Genres, 
actors, directors and languages are modeled as tags components. Movie plot summary is modeled as text component (can be either 
CNN or BOW network). The release year is modeled as a numeric component. The combiner receives the outputs from all components 
and outputs a vector that is compared against the original ‘Pulp Fiction’ CF vector (produced by BPR) using the MSE loss function. 
 
where item 0 is the query and item 1 is the correct item to be 
retrieved. We randomly split the users set to training and test users. 
The training users are used to produce CF item vectors using BPR 
and the test users are used to form a test set 4 of consecutive item 
pairs. In addition, we randomly split the items into two separated 
sets: the first contains training items and the second contains test 
items. We denote the test items set by ). This procedure was 
repeated in a 10 fold cross validation manner. 
4.2 Evaluated Models and Configurations 
We consider two BPR models: the first model is ‘BPR1’ that uses 
the training users set as is. BPR1 does include items from ) in its 
training procedure and hence is an oracle model that can be treated 
as an upper bound for the CB2CF performance. All of the reported 
CF results are based on the CF item vectors produced by BPR1. 
However, in reality, a CF model is not exposed to new test cold 
items during the training phase and cannot infer representations for 
items without usage data. Yet, using BPR1 as a benchmark does 
make sense since it is used to quantify the margin between the 
CB2CF performance and the ‘optimal performance’. BPR1 is used 
for training the different CB2CF in Experiment 1 (Section 4.5). 
    The second model is ‘BPR2’ that is trained on a modified 
training set where for each user all items that belong to ) are 
omitted. This ensures that the CF item vectors, produced by BPR, 
are not affected from relations with test items. BPR2 contains CF 
item vectors for items from the training set only and is used for 
training the CB2CF model in Experiment 2 (Section 4.6). 
Specifically, we further split the CB2CF training set to training and 
validation for hyperparameter selection. 
    The third model is the CB model that maps the items to their 
BOW vectors based on all information sources. The similarity 
between the BOW vectors is computed via the cosine similarity. 
    In order to quantify the relative contribution of each data source 
in our model, we trained different CB2CF configurations, each time 
connecting a single component to the combiner and disconnecting 
all other components. For tags components we trained separate 
models for genres, actors, director and language. When presenting 
results, we intuitively dubbed each of these models according to 
their information sources i.e., ‘Genres’, ‘Actors’, ‘Director’ and 
‘Language’ respectively. For the text components we trained 
separate models for CNN and BOW as explained above and dubbed 
them ‘CNN’ and ‘BOW’. For the numeric component we trained a 
separate model for the release year and dub it ‘Year’. In order to 
quantify the relative contribution of each combination, we further 
trained models for the following combinations of components: 
‘Tags’ – a combination of ‘Genres’, ‘Actors’, ‘Director’ and 
‘Language’. ‘Tags+Year’ – a combination of ‘Tags’ and ‘Year’. 
‘Tags+CNN’ – a combination of ‘CNN’ and ‘Tags’. ‘CNN+Year’ 
– a combination of ‘CNN’ and’ Year’. ‘CNN+Tags+Year’ – a 
combination of ‘CNN’, ‘Tags’ and ‘Year’, which is the CB2CF 
model (Section 3.5). We do not include the ‘BOW’ component in 
the combinations since we found its contribution to be marginal 
once ‘CNN’ is included. 
4.3 Hyperparameters Configuration 
For all of the evaluated models, hyperparameters were determined 
according to a separate validation set. The BPR models (for both 
movies and apps) were trained for 100 epochs with a target 
dimension 3 = 40. The word2vec model was trained for 100 
epochs with a target dimension # = 100, window size 4, 
subsampling parameter 1e-5 and negative to positive ratio 15. For 
the ‘Genres’, ‘Actors’, ‘Director’ and ‘Language’ components, we 
used hidden layers with dimensions 100, 100, 40 and 20, 
respectively. 
    The ‘CNN’ components (for both movies and apps) uses 300 
filters with a length 3 (each filter’s dimensions are in size of 3 ×
100). The input shape for the ‘CNN’ was set to a matrix in size of 
500 × 100. This matrix contains the first 500 words from the 
movie plot / app description, where each word vector is in 
dimension 100. For the ‘BOW’ component, we used hidden layers 
of dimension 256. The number of centroids in k-means was set to 
8 = 256. For the combiner component, we used a hidden layer of 
dimension 256. 
    Each system was trained to minimize the MSE loss function. We 
used the Adam optimizer [17] with a mini-batch size of 32 and 
applied an early stopping procedure [19]. When applied, the L2 
regularization and dropout probability values were set to 3e-5 and 
0.2, respectively. 
4.4 Evaluation Measures 
The first evaluation measure we use is the Mean Squared Error 
(MSE) as measured by the mean squared difference of the (CB2CF) 
predicted vectors from their (BPR) CF item vectors. Formally, 
MSE is measured as follows: ;< =

|>| ∑
‖A −CA‖
A∈>
, where > 
is the set of all test set items, A is the original CF vector, and CA is 
the predicted vector. Minimizing the MSE is the objective of all the 
(CB2CF) systems in this paper. It quantifies the ability of the 
different systems to reconstruct the original CF vectors produced 
by BPR. However, MSE does not have any direct business 
interpretation with regard to the ultimate CF task. Hence, our next 
evaluation measures are borrowed from the field of CF research and 
directly quantify the quality of the predicted vectors with regard to 
the CF task. 
    The second evaluation measure is the Top-K Mean Accuracy. 
The Top-K Accuracy function outputs 1 if for a given test item 
(query), the correct item is ranked among the top k items predicted 
by the model, otherwise 0. Then, the Top-K Mean Accuracy is 
obtained by taking the mean across all Top-K accuracies that are 
computed for all queries. 
    The third evaluation measure is the Mean Percentile Rank 
(MPR) [34]: Given a query item the percentile rank (PR) is the rank 
that assigned by the model to the correct item (to be retrieved) 
divided by the size of the item catalog. Formally, we denote by DA 
the ranked position of the correct item to be retrieved w.r.t. to the 
query item, when measured against the other items based on 
similarity to the predicted vector. For a dataset of M items, the best 
possible rank is DA = 0 and the worst is DA =  −1. The MPR 
measure is computed according to  4E =

|>| ∑
FG
HI
A∈>
.  Note that 
0 ≤4E ≤1, where 4E = 0 is the optimal value (the lower 
the better) and 4E = 0.5 can be achieved by random 
predictions. 
    Our final evaluation measure was chosen to quantify the ability 
of the predicted vectors to maintain the original item similarities. 
Specifically, we care more about the ability to find the most 
relevant item to each test item. Hence, we chose to use the 
Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain [34] for the top K most 
similar items or LMNO/P2. Note that 0 ≤LMNO/P2 ≤1 and 
LMNO/P2 = 1 indicates a “perfect” prediction for the top K most 
similar items. 
4.5 Experiment 1 – CF Space Reconstruction 
(Ablation Study) 
This experiment is designed to quantify the relative contribution of 
each CB source (and their combinations) to reconstruction of the 
CF space, using the CB2CF approach. In this experiment, we used 
the CF item vectors that are produced by BPR1. Table 1 depicts the 
 
6
MSE and MPR (x100) values and Fig. 3 depicts NDCG(K) for 
Movies dataset using the systems described in Section 4.2 (Note 
that MPR and NDCG measures are based on the similarity scores 
that are computed between the CF item vectors and their CB2CF 
based reconstruction). One can see that the evaluation measures are 
highly correlated. In what follows, we identify common trends 
across all evaluation measures and provide interpretations of these 
trends. 
    First, let us consider the ‘BOW’ vs. the ‘CNN’ systems. Both 
systems are based purely on the movie textual descriptions. Our 
results show that the ‘CNN’ approach achieves better 
reconstruction than the ‘BOW’ approach. This showcases the 
ability of the ‘CNN’ model to benefit from the semantic 
information encoded in the word2vec representations as well as the 
ability of the ‘CNN’ filters to pick up the semantical context 
encoded by word propagation in the text. 
    Next, we turn to consider the tags data. As explained in Section 
3.2, there are four types of tags based systems: ‘Genres’, ‘Actors’, 
‘Directors’, and ‘Language’ and we consider each system 
separately. Table 1 and Fig. 3 show that these systems were 
outperformed by ‘CNN’ across all measures. This indicates the 
ability of the ‘CNN’ system to utilize the textual information 
beyond these very informative data sources.  
    The ‘Year’ system, based on movies release year, outperforms 
each of the previous systems including the ‘CNN’. Clearly, a 
movie’s release year alone cannot make for a good recommender 
system. Nevertheless, it captures a key pattern in the MovieLens 
dataset, which is characterized by many users who watch movies 
with adjacent release dates. Typically, movies are heavily promoted 
during their release period and much of the viewing patterns 
recorded in the MovieLens dataset occur during that period. Many 
users watch multiple movies with close release dates. Hence, a 
movie’s release date explains a very dominant pattern in the dataset.  
Finally, we turn to consider systems in which different information 
sources are combined. We notice that each combined model 
generates a considerable performance boost over its respective 
systems. Ultimately, the ‘CNN+Tags+Year’ system (the full 
CB2CF model) outperforms all the rest by combining all these 
information sources together. 
    Table 2 presents MPR and NDCG values obtained by the ‘CNN’ 
system (CB2CF) on the apps dataset (the apps datasets contains 
textual descriptions only). We see that the MPR value obtained by 
the ‘CNN’ model is much better (lower) than the best result 
obtained by the CB2CF model for the movies data (2.35 vs 5.4) that 
leverages metadata as well. We believe this is due to fact the apps 
dataset contains more items and training examples than the movies 
dataset (30K vs 11K) that enables a better fine-tuning of the word 
vectors with respect to the prediction task. 
4.6 Experiment 2 – Completely Cold Item 
Recommendations 
In experiment 1, we showed that by using all CB information 
sources, CB2CF produces the best CF space reconstruction. In 
experiment 2, we investigate the CB2CF item recommendation 
accuracy, when compared to a plain CB model and the BPR1. The 
evaluation is done for completely cold items – items for which 
usage is not available and do not participate in the training phase 
of the models. Note that in this experiment, CB2CF is trained using 
the CF item vectors that are produced by BPR2 – a BPR model that 
was not exposed to the items from the test set ) (Section 4.2). 
    In order to examine the generalization performance of CB2CF 
for cold items, we conduct evaluations on two different test sets of 
items pairs: The first set is the ‘Train Test’ set that consists of all 
pairs /0, 12 in 4, where 0 ∈) ∨1 ∈). The second set is the ‘Test 
Only’ set, where 0 ∈) ∧ 1 ∈) (both items belong to the test items 
set )). Note that the performance of the BPR1 and CB competitors 
models 
should 
be 
approximately 
the 
same 
across 
the 
abovementioned sets, since BPR1 is exposed to all items in the 
catalog during training and the CB model is based on BOW 
representation that utilizes CB data only that is independent of 
usage relations. 
     The movies and apps datasets contain 10K and 20K test users 
and 1100 and 2000 test items, respectively. Using these sets we 
formed the ‘Train Test’ and ‘Test Only’ sets that contain 72K and 
93K, 8K and 13K test movies and apps pairs, respectively. 
Tables 3 and 4 present MPR values (X100) obtained for each 
combination of test set and model for movies and apps, 
respectively. As expected, the best results for all sets are obtained 
by BPR1 (regarded as the optimum oracle). CB2CF significantly 
outperforms CB on all sets. We further observe that the difference 
between MPR values that were obtained by CB2CF for different 
sets is marginal, which means CB2CF generalizes well. As 
expected, the MPR scores produced by both BPR1 and the CB 
model exhibit negligible amount of variation across the different 
sets. 
    Tables 5 and 6 present the Top-20 mean accuracy values 
obtained by the evaluated models on the movies and apps datasets, 
respectively. We see that the same trends from Tabs. 3 and 4 also 
exist in Tabs. 5 and 6. This is another evidence for the ability of 
CB2CF to produce better recommendations than the CB model for 
completely cold items. 
4.7 Qualitative Results 
Table 7 presents movie recommendations based on nearest 
neighbor search (with cosine similarity) in the BPR1 and the 
CB2CF spaces with respect to test queries. All queries contain test 
set items. The second column presents recommendations produced 
using the CF item vectors of BPR1. The third column presents 
recommendations produced by CB2CF (‘CNN+Tags+Year’) that 
utilize all information sources. The last column presents 
recommendations produced by the ‘CNN’ system that leverages 
textual description of movies (plots) solely. 
    Three well-known movies from the test set are considered: 
‘Shrek’ (2001), ‘The Hangover’ (2011) and ‘Gladiator’ (2000). We 
notice a tendency of BPR1 recommendations to prefer popular 
movies. CB2CF tends to pick recommendations from adjacent 
years having the same genre / actors and with similar plots. The 
‘CNN’ model produces recommendations that are not restricted to 
a specific year. Therefore, it contains the recommendations ‘Shrek 
the Third’ and ‘Shrek Forever After’ released in later years (2007 
and 2010). The ‘CNN’ based CB2CF exhibits a similar behavior 
when recommending the third movie in ‘The Hangover’ series. 
This showcases the ability of the ‘CNN’ component alone to 
provide competitive recommendations. 
    Table 8 presents app recommendations produced for the 
Windows Apps dataset, according to similar setting as in Table 5. 
The second column presents recommendations that were produced 
using the BPR1 item vectors. The third column presents 
recommendations produced by CB2CF (using ‘CNN’ as the 
Windows Apps dataset contains text descriptions only). CB2CF 
manages to provide accurate recommendations with respect to the 
given seed based on the textual description of apps solely. 
    Tables 7 and 8 are empirical evidences for the ability of the 
CB2CF approach to produce recommendations that are on par with 
the oracle BPR1 model. Together with the extensive quantitative 
analysis from Sections 4.5 and 4.6, we conclude that CB2CF 
provides a good CB based out-of-sample extension for the CF 
 
manifold and hence can be used as a reliable estimate for the CF 
vectors of completely cold items. 
    In the word2vec paper by Mikolov et al. [5], the authors 
illustrated the ability of their model to automatically organize word 
representations that capture semantical relations. For example, they 
showed that the relationship between a country and its capital is 
captured by the difference between their respective vector 
Table 1: MSE/MPR (x100) values obtained by different 
model configurations on the Movies dataset 
System 
MSE / MPR 
Language 
23.1 / 40.8 
Director 
22.2 / 34.3 
Actors 
21.6 / 25.5 
Genres 
21.3 / 21.4 
BOW 
21.2 / 19.2 
CNN 
20.3 / 17.2 
Year 
19.8 / 15.4 
Tags 
19.2 / 12.4 
CNN + Tags 
18.6 / 11.2 
CNN + Year 
17.4 / 7.6 
Tags + Year 
17.1 / 6.7 
CNN + Tags + Year (CB2CF) 
16.5 / 5.4 
 
Table 2: MPR (x100) and NDCG@10 values 
obtained on the Apps dataset 
System 
MPR / NDCG@10 
CB2CF 
2.35 / 0.86 
Figure 3. Average NDCG scores obtained by different systems for 
various K values (10, 30, 50, 100, 200, 500 1000) on 10 fold cross 
validation. K-axis is in log scale. 
Table 3: MPR (x100) values obtained by 
different models on the Movies test sets  
Model / Set 
Train Test 
Test Only 
BPR1 (oracle) 
15.04 
15.13 
CB2CF 
17.93 
19.51 
CB 
27.18 
27.23 
 
Table 4: MPR (x100) values obtained by 
different models on the Apps test sets  
Model / Set 
Train Test 
Test Only 
BPR1 (oracle) 
12.69 
12.56 
CB2CF 
14.31 
15.91 
CB 
25.02 
25.11 
Table 5: Top-20 mean accuracy values obtained 
by different models on the Movies test sets 
Model / Set 
Train Test 
Test Only 
BPR1 (oracle) 
0.556 
0.551 
CB2CF 
0.482 
0.475 
CB 
0.372 
0.369 
Table 6: Top-20 mean accuracy values obtained 
by different models on the Apps test sets  
Model / Set 
Train Test 
Test Only 
BPR1 (oracle) 
0.733 
0.731 
CB2CF 
0.616 
0.598 
CB 
0.436 
0.431 
Table 7: Top-4 Recommendations produced by different models for test movies  
Query
BPR1 (oracle)
CB2CF using CNN + Tags + Year
CB2CF using CNN only
Shrek (2001)
Monsters Inc., Shrek 2, Finding Nemo, Ice 
Age
Shrek 2, Stuart little 2, Monsters Inc., 
Toy Story 2
Shrek The Third, Shrek Forever After, 
Shrek 2, Finding Nemo
The Hangover 
(2009)
Superbad, Role Models, I Love You Man, 
Knocked Up
The Hangover 2, Grown Ups, Role 
Models, Due Date
21 jump street, The Hangover 3, The 
Hangover 2, Grown Ups
Gladiator 
(2000)
The Patriot, The Last Samurai,
Saving Private Ryan, Enemy at the Gate
The 13th warrior, Story of Joan of arc, 
The Musketeer, The Last Castle
The 13th warrior, King Arthur, 300, Troy
Table 8: Top-4 Recommendations produced by different models for test apps  
Query
BPR1 (oracle)
CB2CF using CNN only
Bitcoin Info (Finance)
BitFlow, Bitcoin Blockchain, Bitcoin Values, 
DogeMuch
Bitcoin Trader, Coin Miner, Bitcoin Markets, Bitcoin Chart+
Pre-League (Soccer)
One Soccer, Soccer Info, La Liga Teams, La Liga
FIFA World Cup'14, The-Football-App, One Soccer, Premier 
League Hub
Cosmetics 
Magazine
(Lifestyle)
Fashion Trends, That Girl, JUSTPROUD Fashion 
News, Hair and Makeup Artistry
Makeup Tricks, Hair & Beauty, Beauty Tutorials, Natural MakeUp
Travel Advice (Travel)
World Destinations, Places to Visit, Local Movies,
Animal-Planet
Travel Advisories, Travel Expert, 100 Must See Places,
Best Travel Destinations
Weight Loser
(Fitness)
Ideal Weight, Calculate Your Calories Burned!, 8 
for Hourglass, Crunch challenge
Diet Chart for Weight Loss, Calculate Your Calories Burned!, Tips 
to Lose Weight Fast, Calories Calculator
 
Table 9: Semantic relations between movie actors, learned by 
CB2CF 
“Dwayne Johnson” - “Sylvester 
Stallone” = Δ 
“Meryl Streep” + Δ = “Cate 
Blanchett”  
“Jim Carrey” - “Brad Pitt” = Δ
“Angelina 
Jolie” 
+ 
Δ
= 
“Jennifer Aniston” 
“Richard Gere” -   “Hugh Grant” 
= ΔT 
“Jason Statham” + ΔT = “Vin 
Diesel” 
 
8
representations (Fig. 2 in [5]). Inspired by this, we demonstrate the 
ability of CB2CF to encode relationships between actors. Actor 
representations are produced by setting the corresponding entry of 
the actor in the ‘Actors’ component to 1 and all other entries to 0. 
    Table 9 presents the learned relationships. The left column 
presents a relationship between actors captured by the distance 
vector between their representations. In the right column, this 
relationship is applied to a new actor by adding the distance vector 
to a new origin. The closest artist is then retrieved and presented. 
    The first example demonstrates a relationship based on a 
generational gap between actors that play in movies of the same 
genre. The second example demonstrates a transition from versatile 
actors to comedy-oriented actors in both genders. Finally, the third 
example demonstrates a transition from American to British actors 
across different genres. 
    Figure 4 depicts a t-SNE [13] embedding of CF item vectors 
produced by BPR1 (a) and the predicted vectors by the CB2CF 
model (b) for a random pick of 800 movies from the top six genres. 
For movies with multiple genres, we simply depict their first tag. 
The figure indicates that genre clustering exists both in the CF 
space and even more so in the CB2CF space. 
    Figure 5 depicts a random pick of 1000 movies from the test set 
and the t-SNE embedding of their CF vectors produced by BPR1 
(a) and the vectors predicted by CB2CF (b). This figure investigates 
the importance of a movie release dates in finding similar items. In 
accordance with our evaluations, Fig. 5 indicates that a release date 
is an important factor in CF similarities as well as in the resulting 
CB2CF predictions. 
5. Conclusion 
In this paper, we introduced the CB2CF model that enables cold 
items recommendations via bridging the gap between CB and CF 
representations. CB2CF learns a neural multiview mapping from 
the CB space to the CF space and is capable of leveraging various 
types of CB inputs such as unstructured text, tags and numeric data. 
We showed that CB2CF outperforms a CB model that is based on 
BOW (in the word2vec space) in completely cold start scenarios 
and produces item similarities that are on par with the ones 
produced by an ‘oracle’ CF model that is based on BPR. 
 
 
 
  (a)
(b)
Figure 5: TSNE visualization of the CF item representation produced by BPR1 (a) and the representation 
produced by CB2CF (b) for random set of 1000 movies. Movies are colored according to their release year. 
 




	
	
	

	


(a)
(b)
Figure 4: TSNE visualization of the CF item representation produced by BPR1 (a) and the representation 
produced by CB2CF (b) for 800 test movies. Movies are colored according to their genres. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet Classification with 
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks,” in Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 25, 2012, pp. 1097–1105. 
[2] A. Graves, A. Mohamed, and G. E. Hinton, “Speech recognition with deep 
recurrent neural networks,” in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech and Signal Processing, {ICASSP} 2013, Vancouver, BC, Canada, May 
26-31, 2013, 2013, pp. 6645–6649. 
[3] Y. Bengio, R. Ducharme, P. Vincent, and C. Janvin, “A Neural Probabilistic 
Language Model,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 3, pp. 1137–1155, Mar. 2003. 
[4] W. Yih, K. Toutanova, J. C. Platt, and C. Meek, “Learning Discriminative 
Projections for Text Similarity Measures,” in Proceedings of the Fifteenth 
Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, 2011, pp. 247–256. 
[5] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Distributed 
Representations of Words and Phrases and their Compositionality,” in Advances 
in Neural Information Processing Systems 26, 2013 
[6] R. Collobert, J. Weston, L. Bottou, M. Karlen, K. Kavukcuoglu, and P. 
Kuksa, “Natural Language Processing (Almost) from Scratch,” J. Mach. Learn. 
Res., vol. 12, pp. 2493–2537, Nov. 2011. 
[7] Y. Kim, “Convolutional Neural Networks for Sentence Classification,” Proc. 
Conf. Empir. Methods Nat. Lang. Process. 2014, pp. 1746–1751, 2014. 
[8] Y. Koren, R. Bell, and C. Volinsky, “Matrix Factorization Techniques for 
Recommender Systems,” Computer., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 30–37, Aug. 2009. 
[9] J. Bennett and S. Lanning, “The Netflix Prize,” in Proceedings of the KDD 
Cup Workshop 2007, 2007, pp. 3–6. 
[10] R. M. Bell and Y. Koren, “Lessons from the Netflix Prize Challenge,” 
SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 75–79, Dec. 2007. 
[11] G. Dror, N. Koenigstein, Y. Koren, and M. Weimer, “The Yahoo ! Music 
Dataset and KDD-Cup ’ 11,” KDD Cup, pp. 8–18, 2012. 
[12] Rendle, S., Freudenthaler, C., Gantner, Z. and Schmidt-Thieme, L., 
2009, June. BPR: Bayesian personalized ranking from implicit feedback. 
In Proceedings of the twenty-fifth conference on uncertainty in artificial 
intelligence (pp. 452-461). AUAI Press. 
[13] L. Van Der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing Data using t-SNE,” JMLR., 
vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605, 2008. 
[14] Chelba C, Mikolov T, Schuster M, Ge Q, Brants T, Koehn P, Robinson 
T. One billion word benchmark for measuring progress in statistical 
language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.3005. 2013 Dec 11.  
[15] Csurka, G., Dance, C., Fan, L., Willamowski, J., & Bray, C. (2004, 
May). Visual categorization with bags of keypoints. In Workshop on 
statistical learning in computer vision, ECCV (Vol. 1, No. 1-22, pp. 1-2). 
[16] Ramos, J. (2003). Using tf-idf to determine word relevance in 
document queries. In Proceedings of the first instructional conference on 
machine learning. 
[17] Kingma, D., & Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic 
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980. 
[18] Harper, F. M., & Konstan, J. A. (2015). The MovieLens Datasets: 
History and Context. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems 
(TiiS), 5(4), 19. 
[19] Prechelt L. Automatic early stopping using cross validation: 
quantifying the criteria. Neural Networks. 1998 Jun 30;11(4):761-7. 
[20] Wang H, Wang N, Yeung DY. Collaborative deep learning for 
recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 2015 Aug 10 (pp. 1235-
1244). ACM. 
[21] Djuric N, Wu H, Radosavljevic V, Grbovic M, Bhamidipati N. Hierarchical 
neural language models for joint representation of streaming documents and their 
content. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on World Wide 
Web 2015 May 18 (pp. 248-255). ACM. 
[22] Xiao, Yao, and Quan Shi. "Research and Implementation of Hybrid 
Recommendation Algorithm Based on Collaborative Filtering and Word2Vec." 
2015 8th International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design 
(ISCID). Vol. 2. IEEE, 2015. 
[23] Pennington J, Socher R, Manning CD. Glove: Global Vectors for Word 
Representation. In EMNLP 2014 Oct 25 (Vol. 14, pp. 1532-43). 
[24] Levy, O. and Goldberg, Y. (2014). Neural word embedding as implicit 
matrix factorization. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 
2177-2185). 
[25] Ngiam, J., Khosla, A., Kim, M., Nam, J., Lee, H., & Ng, A. Y. (2011). 
Multimodal deep learning. In Proceedings of the 28th international conference 
on machine learning (ICML-11) (pp. 689-696). 
[26] Andrew, G., Arora, R., Bilmes, J. A., & Livescu, K. (2013, May). Deep 
Canonical Correlation Analysis. In ICML (pp. 1247-1255). 
[27] Wang, W., Arora, R., Livescu, K., & Bilmes, J. A. (2015, April). 
Unsupervised learning of acoustic features via deep canonical correlation 
analysis. In IEEE ICASSP 2015, (pp. 4590-4594). 
[28] Wang, W., Arora, R., Livescu, K., & Bilmes, J. (2015). On deep multi-view 
representation learning. In Proc. of the 32st Int. Conf. Machine Learn