DKN: Deep Knowledge-Aware Network
for News Recommendation
Hongwei Wang1,2, Fuzheng Zhang2, Xing Xie2, Minyi Guo1∗
1Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
wanghongwei55@gmail.com,{fuzzhang,xingx}@microsoft.com,guo-my@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Online news recommender systems aim to address the informa-
tion explosion of news and make personalized recommendation for
users. In general, news language is highly condensed, full of knowl-
edge entities and common sense. However, existing methods are
unaware of such external knowledge and cannot fully discover la-
tent knowledge-level connections among news. The recommended
results for a user are consequently limited to simple patterns and
cannot be extended reasonably. To solve the above problem, in
this paper, we propose a deep knowledge-aware network (DKN) that
incorporates knowledge graph representation into news recom-
mendation. DKN is a content-based deep recommendation frame-
work for click-through rate prediction. The key component of DKN
is a multi-channel and word-entity-aligned knowledge-aware con-
volutional neural network (KCNN) that fuses semantic-level and
knowledge-level representations of news. KCNN treats words and
entities as multiple channels, and explicitly keeps their alignment re-
lationship during convolution. In addition, to address users’ diverse
interests, we also design an attention module in DKN to dynami-
cally aggregate a user’s history with respect to current candidate
news. Through extensive experiments on a real online news plat-
form, we demonstrate that DKN achieves substantial gains over
state-of-the-art deep recommendation models.
KEYWORDS
News recommendation; knowledge graph representation; deep neu-
ral networks; attention model
1
INTRODUCTION
With the advance of the World Wide Web, people’s news reading
habits have gradually shifted from traditional media such as news-
papers and TV to the Internet. Online news websites, such as Google
News1 and Bing News2, collect news from various sources and pro-
vide an aggregate view of news for readers. A notorious problem
with online news platforms is that the volume of articles can be
overwhelming to users. To alleviate the impact of information over-
loading, it is critical to help users target their reading interests and
make personalized recommendations [2, 25, 27, 32, 34, 39].
Generally, news recommendation is quite difficult as it poses
three major challenges. First, unlike other items such as movies [9]
∗M. Guo is the corresponding author. This work was partially sponsored by the National
Basic Research 973 Program of China under Grant 2015CB352403.
1https://news.google.com/
2https://www.bing.com/news
WWW’18, April 23–27, 2018, Lyon, France.
2018. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
Boris Johnson Has Warned Donald Trump 
To Stick To The Iran Nuclear Deal
Boris 
Johnson
Donald 
Trump
Iran
Nuclear
Politician
Weapon
Congress
United 
States
North 
Korea
North Korean EMP Attack Would Cause Mass 
U.S. Starvation, Says Congressional Report
EMP
……
News the user 
may also like
News the user 
have read
Figure 1: Illustration of two pieces of news connected
through knowledge entities.
and restaurants [12], news articles are highly time-sensitive and
their relevance expires quickly within a short period (see Section
5.1). Out-of-date news are substituted by newer ones frequently,
which makes traditional ID-based methods such as collaborative
filtering (CF) [41] less effective. Second, people are topic-sensitive
in news reading as they are usually interested in multiple specific
news categories (see Section 5.5). How to dynamically measure
a user’s interest based on his diversified reading history for cur-
rent candidate news is key to news recommender systems. Third,
news language is usually highly condensed and comprised of a
large amount of knowledge entities and common sense. For ex-
ample, as shown in Figure 1, a user clicks a piece of news with
title “Boris Johnson Has Warned Donald Trump To Stick To The
Iran Nuclear Deal" that contains four knowledge entities: “Boris
Johnson”, “Donald Trump”, “Iran” and “Nuclear”. In fact, the user
may also be interested in another piece of news with title “North
Korean EMP Attack Would Cause Mass U.S. Starvation, Says Con-
gressional Report” with high probability, which shares a great deal
of contextual knowledge and is strongly connected with the previ-
ous one in terms of commonsense reasoning. However, traditional
semantic models [30] or topic models [3] can only find their relat-
edness based on co-occurrence or clustering structure of words, but
are hardly able to discover their latent knowledge-level connection.
As a result, a user’s reading pattern will be narrowed down to a
limited circle and cannot be reasonably extended based on existing
recommendation methods.
To extract deep logical connections among news, it is necessary
to introduce additional knowledge graph information into news
recommendations. A knowledge graph is a type of directed het-
erogeneous graph in which nodes correspond to entities and edges
correspond to relations. Recently, researchers have proposed sev-
eral academic knowledge graphs such as NELL3 and DBpedia4, as
well as commercial ones such as Google Knowledge Graph5 and
3http://rtw.ml.cmu.edu/rtw/
4http://wiki.dbpedia.org/
5https://www.google.com/intl/bn/insidesearch/features/search/knowledge.html
arXiv:1801.08284v2  [stat.ML]  30 Jan 2018
Microsoft Satori6. These knowledge graphs are successfully applied
in scenarios of machine reading[51], text classification[46], and
word embedding[49].
Considering the above challenges in news recommendation and
inspired by the wide success of leveraging knowledge graphs, in
this paper, we propose a novel framework that takes advantage of
external knowledge for news recommendation, namely the deep
knowledge-aware network (DKN). DKN is a content-based model
for click-through rate (CTR) prediction, which takes one piece of
candidate news and one user’s click history as input, and outputs
the probability of the user clicking the news. Specifically, for a
piece of input news, we first enrich its information by associating
each word in the news content with a relevant entity in the knowl-
edge graph. We also search and use the set of contextual entities of
each entity (i.e., its immediate neighbors in the knowledge graph)
to provide more complementary and distinguishable information.
Then we design a key component in DKN, namely knowledge-aware
convolutional neural networks (KCNN), to fuse the word-level and
knowledge-level representations of news and generate a knowledge-
aware embedding vector. Distinct from existing work [46], KCNN
is: 1) multi-channel, as it treats word embedding, entity embedding,
and contextual entity embedding of news as multiple stacked chan-
nels just like colored images; 2) word-entity-aligned, as it aligns a
word and its associated entity in multiple channels and applies a
transformation function to eliminate the heterogeneity of the word
embedding and entity embedding spaces.
Using KCNN, we obtain a knowledge-aware representation vec-
tor for each piece of news. To get a dynamic representation of a user
with respect to current candidate news, we use an attention module
to automatically match candidate news to each piece of clicked
news, and aggregate the user’s history with different weights. The
user’s embedding and the candidate news’ embedding are finally
processed by a deep neural network (DNN) for CTR prediction.
Empirically, we apply DKN to a real-world dataset from Bing
News with extensive experiments. The results show that DKN
achieves substantial gains over state-of-the-art deep-learning-based
methods for recommendation. Specifically, DKN significantly out-
performs baselines by 2.8% to 17.0% on F1 and 2.6% to 16.1% on
AUC with a significance level of 0.1. The results also prove that the
usage of knowledge and an attention module can bring additional
3.5% and 1.4% in improvement, respectively, in the DKN framework.
Moreover, we present a visualization result of attention values to
intuitively demonstrate the efficacy of the usage of the knowledge
graph in Section 5.5.
2
PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we present several concepts and models related to
this work, including knowledge graph embedding and convolu-
tional neural networks for sentence representation learning.
2.1
Knowledge Graph Embedding
A typical knowledge graph consists of millions of entity-relation-
entity triples (h,r,t), in which h, r and t represent the head, the
relation, and the tail of a triple, respectively. Given all the triples in
a knowledge graph, the goal of knowledge graph embedding is to
6https://searchengineland.com/library/bing/bing-satori
𝑤1:𝑛= [Donald Trump praises Las Vegas medical team]
𝐰1 𝐰2 𝐰3 𝐰4 𝐰5 𝐰6 𝐰7
𝒅× 𝒏word 
embedding 
matrix
Sentence
Feature maps
Max-over-time 
pooling
Convolution
Sentence 
representation
Figure 2: A typical architecture of CNN for sentence repre-
sentation learning [20].
learn a low-dimensional representation vector for each entity and
relation that preserves the structural information of the original
knowledge graph. Recently, translation-based knowledge graph
embedding methods have received great attention due to their
concise models and superior performance. To be self-contained, we
briefly review these translation-based methods in the following.
• TransE [4] wants h + r ≈t when (h,r,t) holds, where h, r
and t are the corresponding representation vector of h, r and
t. Therefore, TransE assumes the score function
fr (h,t) = ∥h + r −t∥2
2
(1)
is low if (h,r,t) holds, and high otherwise.
• TransH [48] allows entities to have different representations
when involved in different relations by projecting the entity
embeddings into relation hyperplanes:
fr (h,t) = ∥h⊥+ r −t⊥∥2
2,
(2)
where h⊥= h −w⊤r hwr and t⊥= t −w⊤r twr are the pro-
jections of h and t to the hyperplane wr , respectively, and
∥wr ∥2 = 1.
• TransR [26] introduces a projection matrix Mr for each rela-
tion r to map entity embeddings to the corresponding relation
space. The score function in TransR is defined as
fr (h,t) = ∥hr + r −tr ∥2
2,
(3)
where hr = hMr and tr = tMr .
• TransD [18] replaces the projection matrix in TransR by the
product of two projection vectors of an entity-relation pair:
fr (h,t) = ∥h⊥+ r −t⊥∥2
2,
(4)
where h⊥= (rph⊤p + I)h, t⊥= (rpt⊤p + I)t, hp, rp and tp are
another set of vectors for entities and relations, and I is the
identity matrix.
To encourage the discrimination between correct triples and
incorrect triples, for all the methods above, the following margin-
based ranking loss is used for training:
L =
Õ
(h,r,t)∈∆
Õ
(h′,r,t′)∈∆′
max  0, fr (h,t) + γ −fr (h′,t ′),
(5)
where γ is the margin, ∆and ∆′ are the set of correct triples and
incorrect triples.
2.2
CNN for Sentence Representation Learning
Traditional methods [1, 43] usually represent sentences using the
bag-of-words (BOW) technique, i.e., taking word counting statistics
as the feature of sentences. However, BOW-based methods ignore
word orders in sentences and are vulnerable to the sparsity problem,
which leads to poor generalization performance. A more effective
way to model sentences is to represent each sentence in a given
corpus as a distributed low-dimensional vector. Recently, inspired
by the success of applying convolutional neural networks (CNN)
in the filed of computer vision [23], researchers have proposed
many CNN-based models for sentence representation learning [7,
19, 20, 53] 7. In this subsection, we introduce a typical type of CNN
architecture, namely Kim CNN [20].
Figure 2 illustrates the architecture of Kim CNN. Let w1:n be the
raw input of a sentence of length n, and w1:n = [w1 w2 ... wn] ∈
Rd×n be the word embedding matrix of the input sentence, where
wi ∈Rd×1 is the embedding of the i-th word in the sentence and
d is the dimension of word embeddings. A convolution operation
with filter h ∈Rd×l is then applied to the word embedding matrix
w1:n, where l (l ≤n) is the window size of the filter. Specifically, a
feature ci is generated from a sub-matrix wi:i+l−1 by
ci = f (h ∗wi:i+l−1 + b),
(6)
where f is a non-linear function, ∗is the convolution operator, and
b ∈R is a bias. After applying the filter to every possible position
in the word embedding matrix, a feature map
c = [c1,c2, ...,cn−l+1]
(7)
is obtained, then a max-over-time pooling operation is used on
feature map c to identify the most significant feature:
˜c = max{c} = max{c1,c2, ...,cn−l+1}.
(8)
One can use multiple filters (with varying window sizes) to obtain
multiple features, and these features are concatenated together to
form the final sentence representation.
3
PROBLEM FORMULATION
We formulate the news recommendation problem in this paper as
follows. For a given user i in the online news platform, we denote
his click history as {ti
1,ti
2, ...,ti
Ni }, where ti
j (j = 1, ..., Ni) is the
title8 of the j-th news clicked by user i, and Ni is the total number of
user i’s clicked news. Each news title t is composed of a sequence of
words, i.e., t = [w1,w2, ...], where each word w may be associated
with an entity e in the knowledge graph. For example, in the title
“Trump praises Las Vegas medical team”, “Trump” is linked with
the entity “Donald Trump", while “Las” and “Vegas” are linked
with the entity “Las Vegas". Given users’ click history as well as
the connection between words in news titles and entities in the
7Researchers have also proposed other types of neural network models for sentence
modeling such as recurrent neural networks [40], recursive neural networks [38],
and hybrid models [24]. However, CNN-based models are empirically proven to be
superior than others [15], since they can detect and extract specific local patterns from
sentences due to the convolution operation. To keep our presentation focused, we
only discuss CNN-based models in this paper.
8In addition to title, it is also viable to use abstracts or snippets of news. In this paper,
we only take news titles as input, since a title is a decisive factor affecting users’
choice of reading. But note that our approach can be easily generalized to any sort of
news-related texts.
knowledge graph, we aim to predict whether user i will click a
candidate news tj that he has not seen before.
4
DEEP KNOWLEDGE-AWARE NETWORK
In this section, we present the proposed DKN model in detail. We
first introduce the overall framework of DKN, then discuss the
process of knowledge distillation from a knowledge graph, the
design of knowledge-aware convolutional neural networks (KCNN),
and the attention-based user interest extraction, respectively.
4.1
DKN Framework
The framework of DKN is illustrated in Figure 3. We introduce the
architecture of DKN from the bottom up. As shown in Figure 3, DKN
takes one piece of candidate news and one piece of a user’s clicked
news as input. For each piece of news, a specially designed KCNN
is used to process its title and generate an embedding vector. KCNN
is an extension of traditional CNN that allows flexibility in incorpo-
rating symbolic knowledge from a knowledge graph into sentence
representation learning. We will detail the process of knowledge
distillation in Section 4.2 and the KCNN module in Section 4.3,
respectively. By KCNN, we obtain a set of embedding vectors for
a user’s clicked history. To get final embedding of the user with
respect to the current candidate news, we use an attention-based
method to automatically match the candidate news to each piece
of his clicked news, and aggregate the user’s historical interests
with different weights. The details of attention-based user interest
extraction are presented in Section 4.4. The candidate news embed-
ding and the user embedding are concatenated and fed into a deep
neural network (DNN) to calculate the predicted probability that
the user will click the candidate news.
4.2
Knowledge Distillation
The process of knowledge distillation is illustrated in Figure 4,
which consists of four steps. First, to distinguish knowledge entities
in news content, we utilize the technique of entity linking [31, 36] to
disambiguate mentions in texts by associating them with predefined
entities in a knowledge graph. Based on these identified entities, we
construct a sub-graph and extract all relational links among them
from the original knowledge graph. Note that the relations among
identified entities only may be sparse and lack diversity. Therefore,
we expand the knowledge sub-graph to all entities within one hop
of identified ones. Given the extracted knowledge graph, a great
many knowledge graph embedding methods, such as TransE [4],
TransH [48], TransR [26], and TransD [18], can be utilized for entity
representation learning. Learned entity embeddings are taken as
the input for KCNN in the DKN framework.
It should be noted that though state-of-the-art knowledge graph
embedding methods could generally preserve the structural infor-
mation in the original graph, we find that the information of learned
embedding for a single entity is still limited when used in subse-
quent recommendations. To help identify the position of entities in
the knowledge graph, we propose extracting additional contextual
information for each entity. The “context” of entity e is defined as
the set of its immediate neighbors in the knowledge graph, i.e.,
context(e) = {ei | (e,r,ei) ∈G or (ei,r,e) ∈G},
(9)
User’s clicked news
Candidate news
Attention Net
KCNN
KCNN
KCNN
KCNN
𝐰1 𝐰2 𝐰3 𝐰4 𝐰5 𝐰6 𝒘7
concat.
User 
embedding
Candidate 
news 
embedding
Click probability
element-wise +
element-wise ×
Candidate news
One of user’s 
clicked news
concat.
weight
Attention Network
𝒅× 𝒏word 
embeddings
𝒅× 𝒏transformed 
entity embeddings
𝒅× 𝒏transformed 
context embeddings
CNN layer
Max-over-time 
pooling
Sentence 
KCNN
DKN
Figure 3: Illustration of the DKN framework.
Trump praises Las Vegas medical team 
Apple CEO Tim Cook: iPhone 8 and 
Apple Watch Series 3 are sold out in 
some places
EU Spain: Juncker does not want 
Catalonian independence
……
Donald Trump: Donald Trump is the 45th president … 
Las Vegas: Las Vegas is the 28th-most populated city … 
Apple Inc.: Apple Inc. is an American multinational … 
CEO: A chief executive officer is the position of  the …
Tim Cook: Timothy Cook is an American business … 
iPhone 8: iPhone 8 is smartphone designed, …
Entity linking
……
Knowledge graph 
construction
Knowledge 
graph 
embedding
Donald Trump: (0.32, 0.48)
Las Vegas: (0.71, -0.49)
Apple Inc.: (-0.48, -0.41)
CEO: (-0.57, 0.06)
Tim Cook: (-0.61, -0.59)
iPhone 8: (-0.46, -0.75)
0
1
-1
Entity 
embedding
-1
0
1
Figure 4: Illustration of knowledge distillation process.
where r is a relation and G is the knowledge graph. Since the
contextual entities are usually closely related to the current entity
with respect to semantics and logic, the usage of context could
provide more complementary information and assist in improving
the identifiability of entities. Figure 5 illustrates an example of
context. In addition to use the embedding of “Fight Club” itself to
represent the entity, we also include its contexts, such as “Suspense”
(genre), “Brad Pitt” (actor), “United States” (country) and “Oscars”
(award), as its identifiers. Given the context of entity e, the context
embedding is calculated as the average of its contextual entities:
e =
1
|context(e)|
Õ
ei ∈context(e)
ei,
(10)
where ei is the entity embedding of ei learned by knowledge graph
embedding. We empirically demonstrate the efficacy of context
embedding in the experiment section.
Fight Club
Brad Pitt
United States
Suspense
Oscars
Inception
award.winner
film.genre
people.nationality
Leonardo 
DiCaprio
film.actor
people.nationality
Los Angeles
location.address
people.gender.male
people.gender
Donald Trump
people.gender
Republican 
Party
polititian.party
Context of entities 
“Fight Club”
film.genre
film.actor
film.country
people.place_of_birth
award.nominated_
work
Figure 5: Illustration of context of an entity in a knowledge
graph.
4.3
Knowledge-aware CNN
Following the notations used in Section 2.2, we use t = w1:n =
[w1,w2, ...,wn] to denote the raw input sequence of a news title
t of length n, and w1:n = [w1 w2 ... wn] ∈Rd×n to denote the
word embedding matrix of the title, which can be pre-learned from
a large corpus or randomly initialized. After the knowledge distilla-
tion introduced in Section 4.2, each word wi may also be associated
with an entity embedding ei ∈Rk×1 and the corresponding con-
text embedding ei ∈Rk×1, where k is the dimension of entity
embedding.
Given the input above, a straightforward way to combine words
and associated entities is to treat the entities as “pseudo words” and
concatenate them to the word sequence [46], i.e.,
W = [w1 w2 ... wn et1 et2 ...],
(11)
where {etj } is the set of entity embeddings associated with this
news title. The obtained new sentence W is fed into CNN [20] for
further processing. However, we argue that this simple concate-
nating strategy has the following limitations: 1) The concatenating
strategy breaks up the connection between words and associated
entities and is unaware of their alignment. 2) Word embeddings
and entity embeddings are learned by different methods, meaning
it is not suitable to convolute them together in a single vector space.
3) The concatenating strategy implicitly forces word embeddings
and entity embeddings to have the same dimension, which may not
be optimal in practical settings since the optimal dimensions for
word and entity embeddings may differ from each other.
Being aware of the above limitations, we propose a multi-channel
and word-entity-aligned KCNN for combining word semantics and
knowledge information. The architecture of KCNN is illustrated in
the left lower part of Figure 3. For each news titlet = [w1,w2, ...,wn],
in addition to use its word embeddings w1:n = [w1 w2 ... wn] as
input, we also introduce the transformed entity embeddings
д(e1:n) = [д(e1) д(e2) ... д(en)]
(12)
and transformed context embeddings
д(e1:n) = [д(e1) д(e2) ... д(en)]
(13)
as source of input9, where д is the transformation function. In
KCNN, д can be either linear
д(e) = Me
(14)
or non-linear
д(e) = tanh(Me + b),
(15)
where M ∈Rd×k is the trainable transformation matrix and b ∈
Rd×1 is the trainable bias. Since the transformation function is
continuous, it can map the entity embeddings and context embed-
dings from the entity space to the word space while preserving
their original spatial relationship. Note that word embeddings w1:n,
transformed entity embeddings д(e1:n) and transformed context
embeddings д(e1:n) are the same size and serve as the multiple
channels analogous to colored images. We therefore align and stack
the three embedding matrices as
W =

[w1 д(e1)д(e1)] [w2 д(e2)д(e2)] ... [en д(en)д(en)]

∈Rd×n×3.
(16)
After getting the multi-channel input W, similar to Kim CNN
[20], we apply multiple filters h ∈Rd×l×3 with varying window
sizes l to extract specific local patterns in the news title. The local
activation of sub-matrix Wi:i+l−1 with respect to h can be written
as
ch
i = f (h ∗Wi:i+l−1 + b),
(17)
and we use a max-over-time pooling operation on the output feature
map to choose the largest feature:
˜ch = max{ch
1 ,ch
2 , ...,ch
n−l+1}.
(18)
All features ˜chi are concatenated together and taken as the final
representation e(t) of the input news title t, i.e.,
e(t) = [˜ch1 ˜ch2 ... ˜chm ],
(19)
where m is the number of filters.
9ei and ei are set as zero if wi has no corresponding entity.
4.4
Attention-based User Interest Extraction
Given user i with clicked history {ti
1,ti
2, ...,ti
Ni }, the embeddings of
his clicked news can be written as e(ti
1), e(ti
2), ..., e(ti
Ni ). To represent
user i for the current candidate news tj, one can simply average all
the embeddings of his clicked news titles:
e(i) = 1
Ni
Ni
Õ
k=1
e(ti
k).
(20)
However, as discussed in the introduction, a user’s interest in news
topics may be various, and user i’s clicked items are supposed to
have different impacts on the candidate news tj when considering
whether user i will click tj. To characterize user’s diverse interests,
we use an attention network [47, 54] to model the different impacts
of the user’s clicked news on the candidate news. The attention net-
work is illustrated in the left upper part of Figure 3. Specifically, for
user i’s clicked news ti
k and candidate news tj, we first concatenate
their embeddings, then apply a DNN H as the attention network
and the softmax function to calculate the normalized impact weight:
st i
k,tj = softmax

H  e(ti
k), e(tj)
=
exp

H  e(ti
k), e(tj)
ÍNi
k=1 exp

H  e(ti
k), e(tj) .
(21)
The attention network H receives embeddings of two news titles
as input and outputs the impact weight. The embedding of user i
with respect to the candidate news tj can thus be calculated as the
weighted sum of his clicked news title embeddings:
e(i) =
Ni
Õ
k=1
st i
k,tj e(ti
k).
(22)
Finally, given user i’s embedding e(i) and candidate news tj’s em-
bedding e(tj), the probability of user i clicking news tj is predicted
by another DNN G:
pi,tj = G e(i), e(tj).
(23)
We will demonstrate the efficacy of the attention network in the
experiment section.
5
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we present our experiments and the corresponding
results, including dataset analysis and comparison of models. We
also give a case study about user’s reading interests and make
discussions on tuning hyper-parameters.
5.1
Dataset Description
Our dataset comes from the server logs of Bing News. Each piece of
log mainly contains the timestamp, user id, news url, news title, and
click count (0 for no click and 1 for click). We collect a randomly
sampled and balanced dataset from October 16, 2016 to June 11, 2017
as the training set, and from June 12, 2017 to August 11, 2017 as the
test set. Additionally, we search all occurred entities in the dataset
as well as the ones within their one hop in the Microsoft Satori
knowledge graph, and extract all edges (triples) among them with
confidence greater than 0.8. The basic statistics and distributions
of the news dataset and the extracted knowledge graph are shown
in Table 1 and Figure 6, respectively.
Table 1: Basic statistics of the news dataset and the extracted
knowledge graph.
# users
141,487
# triples
7,145,776
# news
535,145
avg. # words per title
7.9
# logs
1,025,192
avg. # entities per title
3.7
# entities
336,350
avg. # contextual
entities per entity
42.5
# relations
4,668
“#” denotes “the number of”.
Figure 6a illustrates the distribution of the length of the news
life cycle, where we define the life cycle of a piece of news as the
period from its publication date to the date of its last received
click. We observe that about 90% of news are clicked within two
days, which proves that online news is extremely time-sensitive
and are substituted by newer ones with high frequency. Figure 6b
illustrates the distribution of the number of clicked pieces of news
for a user. 77.9% of users clicked no more than five pieces of news,
which demonstrates the data sparsity in the news recommendation
scenario.
Figures 6c and 6d illustrate the distributions of the number of
words (without stop words) and entities in a news title, respectively.
The average number per title is 7.9 for words and 3.7 for entities,
showing that there is one entity in almost every two words in news
titles on average. The high density of the occurrence of entities also
empirically justifies the design of KCNN.
Figures 6e and 6f present the distribution of occurrence times of
an entity in the news dataset and the distribution of the number
of contextual entities of an entity in extracted knowledge graph,
respectively. We can conclude from the two figures that the occur-
rence pattern of entities in online news is sparse and has a long
tail (80.4% of entities occur no more than ten times), but entities
generally have abundant contexts in the knowledge graph: the aver-
age number of context entities per entity is 42.5 and the maximum
is 140, 737. Therefore, contextual entities can greatly enrich the
representations for a single entity in news recommendation.
5.2
Baselines
We use the following state-of-the-art methods as baselines in our
experiments:
• LibFM [35] is a state-of-the-art feature-based factorization
model and widely used in CTR scenarios. In this paper, the
input feature of each piece of news for LibFM is comprised of
two parts: TF-IDF features and averaged entity embeddings.
We concatenate the feature of a user and candidate news to
feed into LibFM.
• KPCNN [46] attaches the contained entities to the word se-
quence of a news title and uses Kim CNN to learn representa-
tions of news, as introduced in Section 4.3.
• DSSM [16] is a deep structured semantic model for document
ranking using word hashing and multiple fully-connected lay-
ers. In this paper, the user’s clicked news is treated as the query
and the candidate news are treated as the documents.
• DeepWide [6] is a general deep model for recommendation,
combining a (wide) linear channel with a (deep) non-linear
channel. Similar to LibFM, we use the concatenated TF-IDF
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 > 9
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
# lasting days of a piece of news
Proportion of news
(a) Distribution of the length of
news life cycle
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314
    >14
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
# clicked news of a user
Proportion of users
(b) Distribution of the number of
clicked news of a user
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314
    >14
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
# words in a news title
Proportion of news title
(c) Distribution of the number of
words in a news title
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 >9
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
# entities in a news title
Proportion of news title
(d) Distribution of the number of
entities in a news title
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314
    >14
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
occurrence times of an entity
Proportion of entities
(e) Distribution of the occur-
rence times of an entity in the
news dataset
0
25
50
75
>100
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
# contextual entities of an entity
Proportion of entities
(f) Distribution of the number of
contextual entities of an entity
in the knowledge graph
Figure 6: Illustration of statistical distributions in news
dataset and extracted knowledge graph.
features and averaged entity embeddings as input to feed both
channels.
• DeepFM [13] is also a general deep model for recommenda-
tion, which combines a component of factorization machines
and a component of deep neural networks that share the input.
We use the same input as in LibFM for DeepFM.
• YouTubeNet [8] is proposed to recommend videos from a
large-scale candidate set in YouTube using a deep candidate
generation network and a deep ranking network. In this paper,
we adapt the deep raking network to the news recommenda-
tion scenario.
• DMF [50] is a deep matrix factorization model for recom-
mender systems which uses multiple non-linear layers to pro-
cess raw rating vectors of users and items. We ignore the
content of news and take the implicit feedback as input for
DMF.
Note that except for LibFM, other baselines are all based on
deep neural networks since we aim to compare our approach with
state-of-the-art deep learning models. Additionally, except for DMF
which is based on collaborative filtering, other baselines are all
content-based or hybrid methods.
Table 2: Comparison of different models.
Models∗
F1
AUC
p-value∗∗
DKN
68.9 ± 1.5
65.9 ± 1.2
−
LibFM
61.8 ± 2.1 (-10.3%)
59.7 ± 1.8 (-9.4%)
< 10−3
LibFM(-)
61.1 ± 1.9 (-11.3%)
58.9 ± 1.7 (-10.6%)
< 10−3
KPCNN
67.0 ± 1.6 (-2.8%)
64.2 ± 1.4 (-2.6%)
0.098
KPCNN(-)
65.8 ± 1.4 (-4.5%)
63.1 ± 1.5 (-4.2%)
0.036
DSSM
66.7 ± 1.8 (-3.2%)
63.6 ± 2.0 (-3.5%)
0.063
DSSM(-)
66.1 ± 1.6 (-4.1%)
63.2 ± 1.8 (-4.1%)
0.045
DeepWide
66.0 ±1.2 (-4.2%)
63.3 ± 1.5 (-3.9%)
0.039
DeepWide(-)
63.7 ± 0.9 (-7.5%)
61.5 ± 1.1 (-6.7%)
0.004
DeepFM
63.8 ± 1.5 (-7.4%)
61.2 ± 2.3 (-7.1%)
0.014
DeepFM(-)
64.0 ± 1.9 (-7.1%)
61.1 ± 1.8 (-7.3%)
0.007
YouTubeNet
65.5 ± 1.2 (-4.9%)
63.0 ± 1.4 (-4.4%)
0.025
YouTubeNet(-)
65.1 ± 0.7 (-5.5%)
62.1 ± 1.3 (-5.8%)
0.011
DMF
57.2 ± 1.2 (-17.0%)
55.3 ± 1.0 (-16.1%)
< 10−3
* “(-)” denotes “without input of entity embeddings”.
** p-value is the probability of no significant difference with DKN on AUC by t-test.
9/1
9/2
9/3
9/4
9/5
9/6
9/7
9/8
9/9
9/10
0.58
0.60
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68
Date
AUC
 
 
DKN
KPCNN
DSSM
DeepWide
DeepFM
Figure 7: AUC score of DKN and baselines over ten days (Sep.
01-10, 2017).
5.3
Experiment Setup
We choose TransD [18] to process the knowledge graph and learn
entity embeddings, and use the non-linear transformation function
in Eq. (15) in KCNN. The dimension of both word embeddings and
entity embeddings are set as 100. The number of filters are set as
100 for each of the window sizes 1, 2, 3, 4. We use Adam [21] to
train DKN by optimizing the log loss. We will further study the
variants of DKN and the sensitivity of key parameters in Sections
5.4 and 5.6, respectively. To compare DKN with baselines, we use
F1 and AUC value as the evaluation metrics.
The key parameter settings for baselines are as follows. For
KPCNN, the dimensions of word embeddings and entity embed-
dings are both set as 100. For DSSM, the dimension of semantic
feature is set as 100. For DeepWide, the final representations for
deep and wide components are both set as 100. For YouTubeNet,
the dimension of final layer is set as 100. For LibFM and DeepFM,
the dimensionality of the factorization machine is set as {1, 1, 0}.
For DMF, the dimension of latent representation for users and items
is set as 100. The above settings are for fair consideration. Other
parameters in the baselines are set as default. Each experiment
is repeated five times, and we report the average and maximum
deviation as results.
5.4
Results
In this subsection, we present the results of comparison of different
models and the comparison among variants of DKN.
Table 3: Comparison among DKN variants.
Variants
F1
AUC
DKN with entity and context emd.
68.8 ± 1.4
65.7 ± 1.1
DKN with entity emd. only
67.2 ± 1.2
64.8 ± 1.0
DKN with context emd. only
66.5 ± 1.5
64.2 ± 1.3
DKN without entity nor context emd.
66.1 ±1.4
63.5 ± 1.1
DKN + TransE
67.6 ± 1.6
65.0 ± 1.3
DKN + TransH
67.3 ± 1.3
64.7 ± 1.2
DKN + TransR
67.9 ± 1.5
65.1 ± 1.5
DKN + TransD
68.8 ± 1.3
65.8 ± 1.4
DKN with non-linear mapping
69.0 ± 1.7
66.1 ± 1.4
DKN with linear mapping
67.1 ± 1.5
64.9 ± 1.3
DKN without mapping
66.7 ± 1.6
63.7 ± 1.6
DKN with attention
68.7 ± 1.3
65.7 ± 1.2
DKN without attention
67.0 ± 1.0
64.8 ± 0.8
5.4.1
Comparison of different models. The results of compari-
son of different models are shown in Table 2. For each baseline in
which the input contains entity embedding, we also remove the
entity embedding from input to see how its performance changes
(denoted by “(-)”). Additionally, we list the improvements of base-
lines compared with DKN in brackets and calculate the p-value
of statistical significance by t-test. Several observations stand out
from Table 2:
• The usage of entity embedding could boost the performance of
most baselines. For example, the AUC of KPCNN, DeepWide,
and YouTubeNet increases by 1.1%, 1.8% and 1.1%, respectively.
However, the improvement for DeepFM is less obvious. We
try different parameter settings for DeepFM and find that if
the AUC drops to about 0.6, the improvement brought by the
usage of knowledge could be up to 0.5%. The results show that
FM-based method cannot take advantage of entity embedding
stably in news recommendation.
• DMF performs worst among all methods. This is because
DMF is a CF-based method, but news is generally highly time-
sensitive with a short life cycle. The result proves our afore-
mentioned claim that CF methods cannot work well in the
news recommendation scenario.
• Except for DMF, other deep-learning-based baselines outper-
form LibFM by 2.0% to 5.2% on F1 and by 1.5% to 4.5% on AUC,
which suggests that deep models are effective in capturing the
non-linear relations and dependencies in news data.
• The architecture of DeepWide and YouTubeNet is similar in
the news recommendation scenario, thus we can observe com-
parable performance of the two methods. DSSM outperforms
DeepWide and YouTubeNet, the reason for which might be
that DSSM models raw texts directly with word hashing.
• KPCNN performs best in all baselines. This is because KPCNN
uses CNN to process input texts and can better extract the
specific local patterns in sentences.
• Finally, compared with KPCNN, DKN can still have a 1.7%
AUC increase. We attribute the superiority of DKN to its two
properties: 1) DKN uses word-entity-aligned KCNN for sen-
tence representation learning, which could better preserve
the relatedness between words and entities; 2) DKN uses an
attention network to treat users’ click history discriminatively,
which better captures users’ diverse reading interests.
Table 4: Illustration of training and test logs for a randomly sampled user (training logs with label 0 are omitted).
No.
Date
News title
Entities
Label
Category
training
1
12/25/2016
Elon Musk teases huge upgrades for Tesla’s supercharger network
Elon Musk; Tesla Inc.
1
Cars
2
03/25/2017
Elon Musk offers Tesla Model 3 sneak peek
Elon Musk; Tesla Model 3
1
Cars
3
12/14/2016
Google fumbles while Tesla sprints toward a driverless future
Google Inc.; Tesla Inc.
1
Cars
4
12/15/2016
Trump pledges aid to Silicon Valley during tech meeting
Donald Trump; Silicon Valley
1
Politics
5
03/26/2017
Donald Trump is a big reason why the GOP kept the Montana House seat
Donald Trump; GOP; Montana
1
Politics
6
05/03/2017
North Korea threat: Kim could use nuclear weapons as “blackmail”
North Korea; Kim Jong-un
1
Politics
7
12/22/2016
Microsoft sells out of unlocked Lumia 950 and Lumia 950 XL in the US
Microsoft; Lumia; United States
1
Other
8
12/08/2017
6.5 magnitude earthquake recorded off the coast of California
earthquake; California
1
Other
......
test
1
07/08/2017
Tesla makes its first Model 3
Tesla Inc; Tesla Model 3
1
Cars
2
08/13/2017
General Motors is ramping up its self-driving car: Ford should be nervous
General Motors; Ford Inc.
1
Cars
3
06/21/2017
Jeh Johnson testifies on Russian interference in 2016 election
Jeh Johnson; Russian
1
Politics
4
07/16/2017
“Game of Thrones” season 7 premiere: how you can watch
Game of Thrones
0
Other
Figure 7 presents the AUC score of DKN and baselines for ad-
ditional ten test days. We can observe that the curve of DKN is
consistently above baselines over ten days, which strongly proves
the competitiveness of DKN. Moreover, the performance of DKN is
also with low variance compared with baselines, which suggests
that DKN is also robust and stable in practical application.
5.4.2
Comparison among DKN variants. Further, we compare
among the variants of DKN with respect to the following four
aspects to demonstrate the efficacy of the design of the DKN frame-
work: the usage of knowledge, the choice of knowledge graph
embedding method, the choice of transformation function, and the
usage of an attention network. The results are shown in Table 3,
from which we can conclude that:
• The usage of entity embedding and contextual embedding
can improve AUC by 1.3% and 0.7%, respectively, and we can
achieve even better performance by combining them together.
This finding confirms the efficacy of using a knowledge graph
in the DKN model.
• DKN+TransD outperforms other combinations. This is proba-
bly because, as presented in Section 2.1, TransD is the most
complicated model among the four embedding methods, which
is able to better capture non-linear relationships among the
knowledge graph for news recommendation.
• DKN with mapping is better than DKN without mapping,
and the non-linear function is superior to the linear one. The
results prove that the transformation function can alleviate the
heterogeneity between word and entity spaces by self learning,
and the non-linear function can achieve better performance.
• The attention network brings a 1.7% gain on F1 and 0.9%
gain on AUC for the DKN model. We will give a more intuitive
demonstration on the attention network in the next subsection.
5.5
Case Study
To intuitively demonstrate the efficacy of the usage of the knowl-
edge graph as well as the the attention network, we randomly
sample a user and extract all his logs from the training set and the
test set (training logs with label 0 are omitted for simplicity). As
shown in Table 4, the clicked news clearly exhibits his points of in-
terest: No. 1-3 concern cars and No. 4-6 concern politics (categories
are not contained in the original dataset but manually tagged by us).
We use the whole training data to train DKN with full features and
DKN without entity nor context embedding, then feed each possible
pair of training logs and test logs of this user to the two trained
models and obtain the output value of their attention networks.
The results are visualized in Figure 8, in which the darker shade of
blue indicates larger attention values. From Figure 8a we observe
that, the first title in test logs gets high attention values with “Cars”
in the training logs since they share the same word “Tesla”, but the
results for the second title are less satisfactory, since the second
title shares no explicit word-similarity with any title in the training
set, including No. 1-3. The case is similar for the third title in test
logs. In contrast, in Figure 8b we see that the attention network
precisely captures the relatedness within the two categories “Cars”
and “Politics”. This is because in the knowledge graph, “General
Motors” and “Ford Inc.” share a large amount of context with “Tesla
Inc.” and “Elon Musk”, moreover, “Jeh Johnson” and “Russian” are
also highly connected to “Donald Trump”. The difference in the
response of the attention network also affects the final predicted
results: DKN with knowledge graph (Figure 8b) accurately predicts
all the test logs, while DKN without knowledge graph (Figure 8a)
fails on the third one.
5.6
Parameter Sensitivity
DKN involves a number of hyper-parameters. In this subsection,
we examine how different choices of hyper-parameters affect the
performance of DKN. In the following experiments, expect for the
parameter being tested, all other parameters are set as introduced
in Section 5.3.
5.6.1
Dimension of word embedding d and dimension of entity
embedding k. We first investigate how the dimension of word em-
bedding d and dimension of entity embedding k affect performance
by testing all combinations of d and k in set {20, 50, 100, 200}. The
results are shown in Figure 9a, from which we can observe that,
given dimension of entity embedding k, performance initially im-
proves with the increase of dimension of word embedding d. This
is because more bits in word embedding can encode more useful
information of word semantics. However, the performance drops
when d further increases, as a too large d (e.g., d = 200) may intro-
duce noises which mislead the subsequent prediction. The case is
similar for k when d is given.
1  Cars
2  Cars
3  Cars
4  Politics
5  Politics
6  Politics
7  Other
8  Other
Predicted click prob.
Test logs
Training
logs
0.87    0.55    0.29
0.23
(a) without knowledge graph
1  Cars
2  Cars
3  Cars
4  Politics
5  Politics
6  Politics
7  Other
8  Other
Predicted click prob.
Test logs
Training
logs
0.91    0.75    0.86    0.32
(b) with knowledge graph
Figure 8: Attention visualization for training logs and test
logs for a randomly sampled user.
5.6.2
Window sizes of filters and the number of filters m. We
further investigate the choice of windows sizes of filters and the
number of filters for KCNN in the DKN model. As shown in Figure
9b, given windows sizes, the AUC score generally increases as the
number of filters m gets larger, since more filters are able to capture
more local patterns in input sentences and enhance model capability.
However, the trend changes when m is too large (m = 200) due
to probable overfitting. Likewise, we can observe similar rules for
window sizes given m: a small window size cannot capture long-
distance patterns in sentences, while a too large window size may
easily suffer from overfitting the noisy patterns.
6
RELATED WORK
6.1
News Recommendation
News recommendation has previously been widely studied. Non-
personalized news recommendation aims to model relatedness
among news [29] or learn human editors’ demonstration [47]. In
personalized news recommendation, CF-based methods [41] often
suffer from the cold-start problem since news items are substituted
frequently. Therefore, a large amount of content-based or hybrid
methods have been proposed [2, 22, 27, 34, 39]. For example, [34]
proposes a Bayesian method for predicting users’ current news
interests based on their click behavior, and [39] proposes an ex-
plicit localized sentiment analysis method for location-based news
recommendation. Recently, researchers have also tried to combine
other features into news recommendation, for example, contextual-
bandit [25], topic models [28], and recurrent neural networks [32].
The major difference between prior work and ours is that we use
a knowledge graph to extract latent knowledge-level connections
among news for better exploration in news recommendation.
6.2
Knowledge Graph
Knowledge graph representation aims to learn a low-dimensional
vector for each entity and relation in the knowledge graph, while
preserving the original graph structure. In addition to translation-
based methods [4, 18, 26, 48] used in DKN, researchers have also
proposed many other models such as Structured Embedding [5], La-
tent Factor Model [17], Neural Tensor Network [37] and GraphGAN
[42]. Recently, the knowledge graph has also been used in many
applications, such as movie recommendation[52], top-N recom-
mendation [33], machine reading[51], text classification[46] word
20
50
100
200
0.60
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68
k
AUC
 
 
d=20
d=50
d=100
d=200
(a) AUC score w.r.t dimension of
entity embedding k and dimen-
sion of word embedding d
1
1,2
1,2,3 1,2,3,4    1,2,3,4,5
0.60
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68
Window sizes of filters
AUC
 
 
m=20
m=50
m=100
m=200
(b) AUC score w.r.t window sizes
of filters and the number of fil-
ters m
Figure 9: Parameter sensitivity of DKN.
embedding[49], and question answering [10]. To the best of our
knowledge, this paper is the first work that proposes leveraging
knowledge graph embedding in news recommendation.
6.3
Deep Recommender Systems
Recently, deep learning has been revolutionizing recommender
systems and achieves better performance in many recommenda-
tion scenarios. Roughly speaking, deep recommender systems can
be classified into two categories: using deep neural networks to
process the raw features of users or items, or using deep neural
networks to model the interaction among users and items. In addi-
tion to the aforementioned DSSM [16], DeepWide [6], DeepFM [13],
YouTubeNet [8] and DMF [50], other popular deep-learning-based
recommender systems include Collaborative Deep Learning [44],
SHINE [45], Multi-view Deep Learning [11], and Neural Collabora-
tive Filtering [14]. The major difference between these methods and
ours is that DKN specializes in news recommendation and could
achieve better performance than other generic deep recommender
systems.
7
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose DKN, a deep knowledge-aware network
that takes advantage of knowledge graph representation in news
recommendation. DKN addresses three major challenges in news
recommendation: 1) Different from ID-based methods such as col-
laborative filtering, DKN is a content-based deep model for click-
through rate prediction that are suitable for highly time-sensitive
news. 2) To make use of knowledge entities and common sense
in news content, we design a KCNN module in DKN to jointly
learn from semantic-level and knowledge-level representations of
news. The multiple channels and alignment of words and entities
enable KCNN to combine information from heterogeneous sources
and maintain the correspondence of different embeddings for each
word. 3) To model the different impacts of a user’s diverse historical
interests on current candidate news, DKN uses an attention module
to dynamically calculate a user’s aggregated historical represen-
tation. We conduct extensive experiments on a dataset from Bing
News. The results demonstrate the significant superiority of DKN
compared with strong baselines, as well as the efficacy of the usage
of knowledge entity embedding and the attention module.
REFERENCES
[1] Deepak Agarwal and Bee-Chung Chen. 2009. Regression-based latent factor
models. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 19–28.
[2] Trapit Bansal, Mrinal Das, and Chiranjib Bhattacharyya. 2015. Content driven
user profiling for comment-worthy recommendations of news and blog articles.
In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. ACM.
[3] David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation.
Journal of machine Learning research 3, Jan (2003), 993–1022.
[4] Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Duran, Jason Weston, and Ok-
sana Yakhnenko. 2013. Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational
data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2787–2795.
[5] Antoine Bordes, Jason Weston, Ronan Collobert, Yoshua Bengio, et al. 2011.
Learning Structured Embeddings of Knowledge Bases.. In AAAI, Vol. 6. 6.
[6] Heng-Tze Cheng, Levent Koc, Jeremiah Harmsen, Tal Shaked, Tushar Chandra,
Hrishi Aradhye, Glen Anderson, Greg Corrado, Wei Chai, Mustafa Ispir, et al.
2016. Wide & deep learning for recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 1st
Workshop on Deep Learning for Recommender Systems. ACM, 7–10.
[7] Alexis Conneau, Holger Schwenk, Loïc Barrault, and Yann Lecun. 2016. Very
deep co