Company
Advocacy
Safety
Blog
Brand Resources
Careers
Investors
About Twitter Ads
Targeting
Analytics
Ads support
Business blog
Advertise
Documentation
Forums
Communities
Developer blog
Engineering blog
Using Twitter
Managing your account
Safety and security
Rules and policies
Contact us
Insights
Success Stories
Solutions
Collections
Marketing blog
Twitter Flight School
​© 2020 Twitter, Inc.​
Cookies
Privacy
Terms and Conditions
Tags:
Cortex
​@twittereng​ 
Only on Twitter
@Twitter
#OnlyOnTwitter
By ​@twittereng​
Thursday, 13 September 2018
 
Insights
Embeddings@Twitter
Machine-learning models are used across Twitter to enhance the product and serve
the public conversation. The data that supports these models is often extremely
large, complex, and constantly changing. At Twitter, we represent this information in
the form of embeddings. Generating and sharing high-quality, up-to-date
embeddings enables teams to eﬀectively leverage various forms of data, improve
the performance of ML models, and decrease redundant eﬀorts.
 
In this blog post we discuss the commoditized tools, algorithms, and pipelines that
we develop at Twitter to regularly generate embeddings for Twitter entities. This
enables us to share them broadly across the company, thus making embeddings a
ﬁrst-class citizen of Twitter’s ML infrastructure. We will also detail how creating
reliable oﬄine qualitative benchmarks helped us ensure high quality and achieve
quick iteration speed.
What is an embedding?
Simply put, an embedding is a transformation of input data into a more useful
representation — a list of real numbers, called a vector. Note that the usefulness of
the representation can take on a diﬀerent meaning depending on the domain. For
example, if we are embedding words, then we want to ensure the embeddings
contain some sense of semantic meaning. But if feature compression (explained
below) is the goal, then an embedding will be useful if it is compact (low-
dimensional) without losing too much information.
The image below illustrates the concept of representing users as two-dimensional
vectors visualized as coordinates on a graph. We will revisit this concept later; take
note that more similar users are closer together on the graph.
An embedding is usually associated with an entity, which we’ll say is an instance of
some discrete type of interest such as a user, Tweet, author, word, or phrase, etc.
These entity embeddings (in the mapping sense) can be decomposed into two
distinct classes: static and dynamic embeddings. A static embedding is an
embedding of entities such that every entity has one and only one embedding
value. A dynamic embedding, on the other hand, is an embedding of entities such
that each entity can have more than one embedding value. We use the term
dynamic here because the changing embeddings for an entity are often a function
of time. Often people use embedding to refer to both the transformation (verb) as
well as the particular values of the transformation (noun).
There are several practical uses of embeddings with which readers may already be
familiar. In natural language processing (NLP), an embedding is a representation of
a word, phrase, or document as a vector with length typically much smaller than the
vocabulary, with the extra property that the embedding preserves some sense of
semantic meaning. In image or video processing, an embedding can refer to a
compression of the input media pixels into a smaller space. Finally, matrix
factorization methods used in collaborative ﬁltering assign each user and each item
an embedding from a row or column of a matrix.
Why embeddings?
In this section we explain the leading beneﬁts of using embeddings at Twitter.
Model features
Most ML algorithms understand one kind of input — a vector. However, data rarely
ﬁts nicely into that form: e.g., Twitter users. Traditionally, in order to represent a user
as a vector, a ML practitioner will employ techniques such as one-hot encoding. In
this case, each user is mapped to a diﬀerent dimension of a vector space of ﬁxed
size. While this method works well for some cases, the resulting vector can have
hundreds of millions of dimensions and only contain a small amount of meaningful
information.
Entity embeddings, or learned representations, try to address this problem.
Embeddings are themselves an output of other machine-learning models, trained
directly on the sparse data.
Such models compress the high-dimensional feature space into a dense, lower-
dimensional space while preserving salient information about the original entity. For
a clarifying example, let’s train user embeddings using follower relationship as input
data as described above and take the embeddings corresponding to the users:
Stephen Curry (@StephenCurry30), Lebron James (@KingJames), Bruno Mars
(@BrunoMars), and Kendrick Lamar (@kendricklamar). We expect the distance
between the embeddings of the NBA players to be smaller than the distance
between the embeddings of a player and a musician. If we denote with e(user) the
embedding of the user, then what we are saying is
where dist is the Euclidean distance.
 
A model using embeddings as input features will beneﬁt from their encoded
knowledge, and therefore improve performance. On top of that, assuming
compactness of the embeddings, the model itself will require fewer parameters,
resulting in faster iteration speed and cost savings in terms of infrastructure during
both training and serving.
 
Feature compression
As ML engineers continue to reﬁne and improve a model, the number of input
features may grow to such a size that online inference slows to the point where
adding more features is intractable. Precomputed embeddings oﬀer a solution if
some of the features are known prior to inference time and can be grouped together
and passed through one or more layers of the network. This “embedding
subnetwork” can be run in batch oﬄine or in an online prediction service. The
returned output embeddings will then be stored for online inference, where latencies
will be much faster than if the full network had to be evaluated.
Nearest neighbor search
Many product surfaces at Twitter aim to make some kind of recommendation to
users, whether they be other users to follow, Tweets to read, or videos to watch.
Usually the ﬁrst step in recommendations is to generate from the entire collection of
items a smaller set of quality candidates (candidate generation). Being able to ﬁnd
similar items is an essential task for many candidate generation schemes, and one
way to accomplish it is to ﬁnd an embedding of items and a measure of distance
between them such that similar items have embeddings that are close together.
This search based on distance between items is called nearest neighbor search.
This technique ﬁnds use in a variety of applications such as search query expansion
and recommendation systems.
 
Transfer learning
Embeddings are also often used in the context of transfer learning, which is a
general machine-learning strategy where a model trained for one task is used in
another. A simple example of this is using a trained, generic image model (typically
a convolutional neural net) on a new image task by using the parameters of the
original network as the starting point for training the new one. Using trained model
parameters as the initialization of a new network and then letting the parameters be
updated via the learning method is called ﬁne-tuning and can give faster
convergence and better-performing algorithms.
We will also note quickly that from a business perspective transfer learning is a very
attractive method since it can reduce the development time to a ﬁrst shippable
model and help leverage information learned from disparate areas of the product.
Goals:
As we develop the systems and processes to enable widespread use of
embeddings at Twitter, it’s worth spelling out goals for development of the same
that we deﬁned for ourselves, and realize that sometimes we will be forced to make
trade-oﬀs between them.
Our development goals:
•
Quality and relevance
•
Creation and consumption with ease
•
Sharing and discoverability
Quality and relevance
We want embeddings that help us build great ML models. We want quality
embeddings that provide meaningful entity representations. But we also must
realize that the quality of an embedding may degrade over time. User behavior
evolves, and so must their embedding representation. Similarly, the underlying
meaning of words will change with time. We need to make sure our embeddings are
relevant at the time of their application and, if required, that they are general enough
to be of use across a variety of models (see “Embedding pipeline” section below).
Creation and consumption with ease
We should provide plug-and-play components that allow customers to learn
embedding maps on their own and then generate the embeddings themselves at
scale with ease. If a customer just wants to plug a widely applicable canonical
embedding in their model they should have the tools to do so without having to care
about how the embeddings were trained or stored.
Sharing and discoverability
Embeddings are not the end goal but an intermediate tool that, if suﬃciently
general, can be used in many tasks. Therefore, to maximize their usefulness they
should be easily discovered and applied on new problems. We must consider from
the outset how this sharing will take place and its consequences and side eﬀects,
both from engineering and modeling perspectives.
Embedding pipeline:
Since learned embeddings are machine-learning models, they require data to train
and may be cumbersome to store and deploy. Furthermore, embeddings need to be
regularly retrained and benchmarked — especially in a constantly changing system
like Twitter. In order to address these issues and reap the beneﬁts of embeddings,
we have developed a series of tools that make it simple for teams throughout
Twitter to customize, develop, access, and share embeddings.
Embedding generation pipelines often consist of a sequence of steps that can be
diﬃcult to maintain and reuse. In order to address this, we implement them within
the Twitter ML Workﬂows platform — a system built on top of Apache Airﬂow that
links data processing and ML components into reusable pipelines that can be
conﬁgured with a web interface. This makes it much easier for teams to share steps
between pipelines, keep embeddings up to date, and modify pipelines to publish
customized embeddings. Each of our embedding generation pipelines consist of the
following steps:
Item selection. In this step, we identify the set of items to generate embeddings
for.
•
In our word embedding pipelines, we use this step to select the tokens
(hashtags, usernames, emojis, words, URLs, etc.) that we will assign
embeddings to
•
In some of our user embedding pipelines, we use this step to identify the users
who have enough information to assign an embedding to.
Data preprocessing. In this step, we assemble a dataset of entity relationships that
we can use to train the embedding model. We generally perform this step in
Scalding, Twitter's Scala-based map-reduce engine.
•
In our skip-gram word embedding pipeline, we use this step to form a set of
(word_1, word_2) skip-gram pairs, where word_1 appeared near word_2 in a
recent Tweet.
•
In our user graph embeddings pipeline, we use this step to construct a dataset
of (user_1, user_2) pairs where user_1 and user_2 are connected through
Twitter's follow or engagement graph.
Model ﬁtting. In this stage we ﬁt a model on the data that we have collected. We
use a variety of algorithms for model ﬁtting, including matrix factorization, linear
gradient-based approaches, and deep neural networks.
•
In our skip-gram word embedding pipeline, we use a gradient-descent and
negative-sampling based approach to assign embeddings to words from their
skip-gram pairs.
•
In our follow graph SVD pipeline, we use an SVD algorithm to convert the
adjacency matrix that represents Twitter's follow graph into a set of embeddings
for Twitter users.
Benchmarking. Unlike with a classiﬁcation or regression model, it’s notoriously
diﬃcult to measure the quality of an embedding. One of the reasons for this is that
diﬀerent teams use embeddings diﬀerently. For example, while some teams use
user embeddings as model inputs, others use them in nearest neighbor systems. To
mitigate this problem we have developed a variety of standard benchmarking tasks
for each type of embedding.
•
User topic prediction. During onboarding, Twitter users may indicate which
topics interest them. The ROC-AUC of a logistic regression trained on user
embeddings to predict those topics is a measure of that embedding’s ability to
represent user interests.
•
Metadata prediction. Certain users provide their demographic information (such
as gender, age, etc). The ROC-AUC of a logistic regression trained on user
embeddings to predict this metadata is a measure of how well that embedding
might perform on a downstream machine-learning task.
•
User follow Jaccard. We can estimate the similarity of two users’ tastes by the
Jaccard index of the sets of accounts that the users follow. Over a set of user
pairs, the rank order correlation between the users’ embedding similarity (as
determined by the cosine distance between the users' embeddings) and their
follow sets' Jaccard index is a measure of how well the embedding groups users.
Feature store registration. In the ﬁnal step of our embedding pipeline, we publish
the embeddings to the "feature store," Twitter's shared feature repository. This
enables machine-learning teams throughout Twitter to easily discover, access, and
use freshly trained embeddings.
 
What’s next?
As we continue to work toward enabling product teams to use embeddings-based
ML solutions, we are focused on further developing more new reusable algorithms
and scaling the existing ones. We also would like to see adoption increase among
product teams learning and publishing their own embeddings to the centralized
feature store, thus creating the ﬂywheel that powers ML models across Twitter.
Additionally, we are investing in creating scalable nearest neighbor lookup
infrastructure such that product teams can utilize the learned embeddings beyond
the model feature use case. We have also achieved promising results experimenting
with embeddings as a means for feature compression and are looking forward to
building on those results. We will continue to share our progress and lessons
learned along the way as the team continues making progress.
Acknowledgements:
This blog was authored by Dan Shiebler (@dshieble), Chris Green (@cmgreen210),
Luca Belli (@__lucab) and Abhishek Tayal (@tayal_abhishek), all members of Cortex
MLX (ML Extended Environment) team.
We would like to thank all the members of the MLX team for their contributions
toward shaping our technical vision and executing on it: Nimalan Mahendran, Max
Hansmire, Apoorv Sharma, Shivam Verma, and Yang Wu. Honorable mention to
management for supporting us in this endeavor: Nicolas Koumchatzky, Jan
Pedersen, and Sandeep Pandey. We would also like to extend our gratitude to the
product management team consisting of Matthew Bleifer, Tim Sweeney, and
Theodore Summe for helping us deﬁne the product oﬀering and ensuring we deliver
the desired experience for our customers. Special thanks to Hanchen Xiong for
collaborating with us in the early days of the eﬀort and helping us make big strides.
And ﬁnally, a special thanks to all the people at Twitter who continue to work with
us and provide valuable feedback during our beta oﬀering. 
 
More from
Insights
Improving engagement on digital ads with delayed
feedback
By Justina Chen and Ira Ktena on Thursday, 19 September 2019
Twitter meets TensorFlow
By Nicholas Léonard and Cibele Montez Halasz on Thursday, 14 June 2018
One pattern to rule them all
By Matt Gross and ​@drballstothewal​ on Wednesday, 25 September 2019
Twitter for Mac is coming back!
By Nolan O'Brien on Friday, 14 June 2019
See what's
happening
​@Twitter​
 
 
 
 
 
 
About
Business
Developers
Help Center
Marketing
Engineering
Insights
Infrastructure
Open source
Sign Up
