General-Purpose User Embeddings based on Mobile App Usage
Junqi Zhang1∗, Bing Bai1∗, Ye Lin1, Jian Liang1, Kun Bai1, Fei Wang2
1Cloud and Smart Industries Group, Tencent, China
2Cornell University, USA
{benjqzhang,icebai,yessicalin,joshualiang,kunbai}@tencent.com
few2001@med.cornell.edu
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we report our recent practice at Tencent for user
modeling based on mobile app usage. User behaviors on mobile
app usage, including retention, installation, and uninstallation, can
be a good indicator for both long-term and short-term interests of
users. For example, if a user installs Snapseed recently, she might
have a growing interest in photographing. Such information is valu-
able for numerous downstream applications, including advertising,
recommendations, etc. Traditionally, user modeling from mobile
app usage heavily relies on handcrafted feature engineering, which
requires onerous human work for different downstream applica-
tions, and could be sub-optimal without domain experts. However,
automatic user modeling based on mobile app usage faces unique
challenges, including (1) retention, installation, and uninstallation
are heterogeneous but need to be modeled collectively, (2) user
behaviors are distributed unevenly over time, and (3) many long-
tailed apps suffer from serious sparsity. In this paper, we present a
tailored AutoEncoder-coupled Transformer Network (AETN), by
which we overcome these challenges and achieve the goals of reduc-
ing manual efforts and boosting performance. We have deployed
the model at Tencent, and both online/offline experiments from
multiple domains of downstream applications have demonstrated
the effectiveness of the output user embeddings.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems →Data mining.
KEYWORDS
user modeling; embeddings; autoencoder; transformer; app usage
ACM Reference Format:
Junqi Zhang1∗, Bing Bai1∗, Ye Lin1, Jian Liang1, Kun Bai1, Fei Wang2. 2020.
General-Purpose User Embeddings based on Mobile App Usage. In 26th
ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD
’20), August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/XXXXXX.XXXXXX
∗Equal contributions from both authors. This work is done when Junqi Zhang works
as an intern at Tencent.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7998-4/20/08...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/XXXXXX.XXXXXX
Present
Past
Figure 1: Illustration of retention, installation, and uninstal-
lation. Operations of (un)installation are low-frequency and
unevenly distributed over time.
1
INTRODUCTION
Personalized mobile business, e.g., recommendations, and advertis-
ing, often require effective user representations. For better perfor-
mance, user modeling in industrial applications often considers as
much information as possible, including but not limited to gender,
location, interested tags, accounts subscribed, and shopping inter-
ests [24]. Among which, user behaviors on mobile app usage, in-
cluding retention (which apps are currently installed on the phone),
installation (when and which apps were ever installed recently),
and uninstallation (when and which apps were removed from the
phone recently), contain rich information about both long-term
and short-term user interests [25]. For example, if a user installs
Google Photos, Snapseed, and Instagram, there is a good chance that
she is an enthusiast of mobile photographing. If a user installs the
popular game Honor of Kings, a.k.a. Arena of Valor recently, she
might be a new gamer and is wondering how to play better. Such
information is valuable for various downstream applications, and
how to utilize them better is an exciting problem worthy of solving.
Traditionally, mining from mobile app usage relies on task-
specific handcrafted features. For example, recommending a new
game app to users who have installed similar games can help avoid
recommending to non-gamers. However, handcrafted feature engi-
neering often requires substantial human efforts, and maybe sub-
optimal when domain experts are absent. To improve efficiency and
effectiveness, an automatic generation for general-purpose user
representations from user behaviors on mobile app usage is in need.
We have been working towards this goal since mid 2019, and
several versions of models have been deployed. In this paper, we
outline the most recent practice at Tencent. The main challenges of
building general-purpose user representations for multiple down-
stream applications include:
• Retention, installation and uninstallation need to be
modeled collectively. They represent the preference of
users from different aspects, and building representations
for the three parts separately and then concatenating them
may limit the performance. For example, for users who have
installed multiple games, uninstalling a game app may only
arXiv:2005.13303v1  [cs.LG]  27 May 2020
Transformer
Encoder Part
Multi-Head Self-Attention
Add & Normalize
Add & Normalize
Feed Forward Network
Stacking
  𝑎#
$
  𝑑#
$
  𝑎&
$
  𝑑&
$
  𝑎'
$
  𝑑'
$
  𝑎#
(
  𝑑#
(
  𝑎&
(
  𝑑&
(
  𝑎'
(
  𝑑'
(
installation
uninstallation
retention
Sharing App 
Embeddings
0
1
0
0
1
··· ···
0
0
1
0
0
Weight
Tying
Music
Social
Video
Secure
Game
Game
Social
Social
Social
Multi-Head Self-Attention
Add & Normalize
Add & Normalize
Feed Forward Network
  𝑑#
$
  𝑑&
$
  𝑑'
$
  𝑑#(
  𝑑&
(
  𝑑'(
installation
uninstallation
Video
Secure
Game
Game
Social
Social
Music
Social
Social
0
1
0
0
1
··· ···
0
0
1
0
0
Transformer
Decoder Part
Retention Autoencoder Part
User Embeddings
(Bottleneck Layer)
Stacking
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
Figure 2: The overview of the proposed AETN model. The model is tailored for learning effective user embeddings from mo-
bile app usage unsupervisedly. The retention autoencoder part aims to learn good representations for apps and user retention
based on co-occurrence relationships. The transformer encoder part models the retention, installation, and uninstallation
information collectively, and maps the user to an embedding at the bottleneck layer. The user embeddings are forced to main-
tain as most information as possible by the transformer decoder part, which reconstructs the installation and uninstallation
sequences. Besides, the user embeddings also need to be able to reconstruct the retention.
indicate that she has finished the game and wants to start a
new one. While for a user who has not installed other games,
immediately uninstalling after installation may suggest that
she does not like this kind of game at all. Modeling such
complex relationships using traditional recurrent neural net-
works (RNNs) is challenging.
• Actions of (un)installing apps are low-frequency and
unevenly distributed over time. Figure 1 presents a demo
of app installation and uninstallation records of a user. As
excitement over the new phone fades, most users only install
or uninstall apps when they need to. Moreover, users usually
do not operate for even a month but may suddenly install or
uninstall several apps in a single day. In this case, various
intervals between every two behaviors are not omittable.
Although RNN-based models have succeeded in analyzing
user activities [15, 20], the behaviors in those scenarios are
usually with notably higher-frequency and nearly even dis-
tribution over time. Therefore, traditional RNNs may not
perform well for this task.
• Many long-tailed apps suffer from serious sparsity. Pop-
ular apps like Wechat and Alipay have been installed on
almost all the smartphones in China, while long-tailed apps
may only have a few hundreds of installations among one
million users. However, user’s behaviors over the long-tailed
apps often reflect one’s personalized interests better. Building
effective user representations need to utilize the information
from long-tailed apps without suffering from severe sparsity.
To achieve the goal, we design a tailored AutoEncoder-coupled
Transformer Network (AETN) to analyze user behaviors on mobile
app usage. The model follows a classical encoder-decoder frame-
work with a bottleneck for user representation learning, and utilizes
a multi-objective joint training scheme for parameter learning. Fig-
ure 2 shows the general framework. The model mainly consists of
three parts, i.e., the retention autoencoder part, the (stacked) trans-
former encoder part, and the (stacked) transformer decoder part.
The three parts are tied through parameter sharing and trained
jointly. The proposed model is entirely unsupervised and carefully
optimized for learning user embeddings from mobile app usage.
The retention autoencoder serves as a foundational part of AETN.
From the co-occurrence relationship of apps in retention data, it
learns and shares effective app embeddings with the transformer
network. As one of the designs to alleviate the problem of sparsity,
we model the embeddings of apps with both app IDs and their corre-
sponding category IDs. Therefore, if the usage of an app is gravely
sparse, at least the category ID can provide some information. An-
other design is weight tying between the encoder and the decoder.
Note that we only tie the first and the last layer of the autoencoder
to leave enough flexibility. Weight tying can significantly reduce
the number of free parameters, and hasten the convergence [14].
Together with app embeddings, effective representations of user
retention are obtained and provided to the transformer parts.
On the other hand, the transformer parts model the retention,
installation, and uninstallation collectively, and output the final
user embeddings. Transformer networks have been proved effective
for modeling (multiple) sequences and obtaining contextual repre-
sentations in natural language processing [9]. Inspired by BERT [9],
in this paper, we use a stacked transformer network to consolidate
different types of information.
The transformer encoder part receives the user retention, shared
app embeddings, date embeddings, and behavior type embeddings (re-
tention, installation, and uninstallation) as input. Thus, the inputs
altogether include complete information on when and whether
users install or uninstall what apps as well as their current status of
app usage. The date embeddings make the transformer suitable for
modeling user behaviors that are low-frequency and distribute un-
evenly over time. Besides, we also introduce a masked app prediction
task like BERT [9] to help extract information more productively.
After compressing all the input information at a bottleneck layer,
the (stacked) transformer decoder part tries to reconstruct the
(un)installation sequences. The reconstruction follows a manner
similar to non-autoregressive translation [12]. And the date em-
beddings, as well as the behavior type embeddings, are used as the
queries. We also reconstruct the retention data from the bottleneck
layer with a multi-layer perceptron network. The reconstruction
processes force the bottleneck to retain as much information as
possible from the original input through the transformer encoder.
Besides, we use weight tying in the output layers of both the
transformer encoder and the decoder. Moreover, to better encour-
age information interaction within the transformer network, we
proposed a modified multi-head self-attention mechanism where
the representations of retention or bottleneck are fed to attention
mechanisms more directly during every attention step. All the com-
ponents mentioned above are trained jointly over data from tens of
millions of users of Tencent. Representations from the bottleneck
of the transformer network are used as general-purpose user em-
beddings, which can fertilize many downstream applications that
require user representations. The main contributions of our work
are summarized as follows:
• We introduce our recent practice of general-purpose user
embedding learning based on mobile app usage for multiple
downstream applications.
• We propose a tailored model AETN to achieve the goal.
With a carefully-designed neural network structure, the
autoencoder-coupled transformer network overcomes the
serious sparsity of long-tailed apps and the uneven distribu-
tion of activities, and models user behaviors on mobile app
usage collectively. Our code is publicly available.1
• The cost of model training is acceptable in real application
scenarios. Extensive online and offline experiments verify
the effectiveness of the proposed model, which has been
deployed in a real system at Tencent and achieved boosted
performance in daily business.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We introduce the
background in Section 2. Section 3 and Section 4 describe our high-
level system and the detailed design of AETN respectively. We
present offline experiments and the online A/B testing in Section 5
and Section 6. The details of model deployment are presented in
Section 7. Related work is discussed in Section 8, and Section 9
draws the conclusion.
1https://github.com/Junqi-Zhang/AETN
2
BACKGROUND
Tencent Mobile Manager is currently the most prevalent mobile
security and management app in China, which serves nearly one
billion users. We provide various auxiliary functionalities, includ-
ing news recommendations, short video recommendations, app
recommendations, etc. For example, users can reach personalized
content feeds, including news, articles, and short videos, from the
“Good Morning” tab of Tencent Mobile Manager, as well as from
the “Find” tab of Tencent Wi-Fi Manager, a wingman app of Tencent
Mobile Manager.
We have built a data center to support various downstream ap-
plications. Traditional handcrafted feature engineering and shallow
models may not maximize the value of data, therefore, in terms of
user behaviors on mobile app usage, general-purpose user repre-
sentations are desired.
3
SYSTEM OVERVIEW
In this section, we introduce our AETN-based system from a high-
level perspective and review its data processing, model training,
and serving components.
3.1
Data Preprocessing
We need to preprocess the user data into a format suitable for subse-
quent models to handle and also reduce the noise in data. After data
preprocessing, each user is represented with one’s “retention” and
four sequences. “Retention” is a set of apps installed on one’s phone
at present. Two of the sequences, representing recent “installation”
operations, are composed of installed apps and corresponding dates.
The rest two sequences represent recent “uninstallation” operations.
To reduce the noise in user behaviors, we keep the most recent 10
installation or uninstallation operations in a week for each user.
We use the following criteria to select the apps considered in the
model.
• We manually exclude some top-ranked apps which have
been installed on almost every smartphone and can hardly
represent user interests, such as Wechat. Meanwhile, we keep
apps like Honor of Kings despite that they are popular, for
they could still represent users’ personalized interests.
• We exclude the apps pre-installed on smartphones by the
manufacturers.
• We also exclude the niche apps with installed capacities
under a threshold.
Besides, one app may have multiple package_names for differ-
ent brands and models of smartphones. They are all merged to
avoid duplication. For the categories of apps, we consider relatively
finer-grained app categories, for example, we distinguish different
subcategories of “Game” apps.
3.2
Model Training and Serving
After preprocessing data, we train the model and generate the user
embeddings with the following steps,
• Step 1: Model Training. We train the AETN using tens of
millions of users.
• Step 2: Inference. We extract user embeddings for all the
users, and push the embeddings to a DCache system2 for
serving.
• Step 3: Serving. Downstream applications can retrieval user
embeddings using the feature ID and user IDs. Gradient
boosting decision trees (GBDTs) and neutral networks (NNs)
are typically used as downstream models.
More details about the deployment are in Section 7.
4
AUTOENCODER-COUPLED
TRANSFORMER NETWORK
In this section, we first define the notations of user behaviors,
followed by the detailed structure of the proposed network. Then,
we elaborate on our designs for alleviating the problem of sparsity
and our modification to vanilla transformers. Finally, we present
the multi-objective joint training scheme for model optimization.
4.1
Notations of User Behaviors
As stated in Section 3.1, behaviors of each user are preprocessed
into one’s “retention” and four sequences defined as follows.
Retention. The retention of user u can be represented by a
multi-hot vector xu ∈RM, and xum = 1 when app m is installed,
where M is the number of considered apps.
Installation and Uninstallation. The four sequences, repre-
senting user u’s latest I operations on installing or uninstalling
apps, are denoted by Su:
Su =

[an
u,1, . . . ,an
u,i, . . . ,an
u,I ], [dn
u,1, . . . ,dn
u,i, . . . ,dn
u,I ],
[al
u,1, . . . ,al
u,i, . . . ,al
u,I ], [dl
u,1, . . . ,dl
u,i, . . . ,dl
u,I ]
	
.
Specifically, an
u,i represents the ID of i-th newly installed app of u,
and dn
u,i is the corresponding date. al
u,i and dl
u,i are the counter-
parts for uninstallation. Additionally, 1 ≤an
u,i, al
u,i ≤M, and all
the operations happened in the latest T time intervals.
Note that in the rest of the paper, we omit the subscript u indi-
cating a user in most notations for simplification.
4.2
Network Structure
As shown in Figure 2, an autoencoder for retention, a transformer
encoder, and a transformer decoder are three main parts in the
proposed model. We connect the latter two parts with a bottleneck
layer. There is also an embedding layer for the transformer encoder
and another one for the decoder. Details about the network structure
are as follows.
Retention Autoencoder. The AETN employs an autoencoder
of three hidden layers to reconstruct and encode one’s retention.
The autoencoder can be described with triple tuples (f (p), W(p),b(p)),
where p ∈{1, 2, 3, 4}. W(p) and b(p) are weights and biases of the
p-th layer, and f (p) represents the corresponding activation func-
tion. We choose the commonly used LeakyReLU [27] as the activa-
tion function for the former three layers, and f (4) is the sigmoid
function. Let x(p) represent the outputs of each layer, and it can be
calculated as follows:
x(p) = f (p)(x(p−1)W(p) + b(p)), p ∈{1, 2, 3, 4},
(1)
2https://github.com/Tencent/DCache
where x(0) is normalized from one’s retention x using the ℓ2 norm.
The role of this autoencoder is two-folds. Firstly, it helps to learn
high-quality app embeddings from the co-occurrence relationship
of apps. The weight matrix of the first hidden layer W(1) acts as
the shared app embedding matrix Wa for the whole network, i.e.,
we have
Wa = W(1) ∈RM×dmodel .
(2)
To further alleviate the problem of sparsity, the shared app embed-
ding matrix is carefully designed and tied with some other weight
matrices. More details are provided in Section 4.3.
Secondly, this autoencoder provides effective representations of
user retention for the transformer part. The transformer encoder
part needs to be fed with the retention for compressing long-term
interests into user embeddings. However, retention is originally
in the form of high-dimensional sparse features. This autoencoder
encodes retention into the first hidden layer x(1) ∈Rdmodel . As a
low-dimensional dense encoding, x(1) plays an important role in
the transformer encoder part.
Transformer Encoder & Its Embedding Layer. The trans-
former encoder is the core part of AETN to combine and compress
all the information, which does not work without a suitable em-
bedding layer. Inspired by positional encodings [33], we design an
embedding layer for the transformer encoder based on the shared
app embeddings, date embeddings, and behavior type embeddings,
as illustrated in Figure 3.
𝒘"
𝒘"
𝒘#
𝒘#
𝒘#
𝒘$
𝒘"
𝒘%
&
𝒘'
&
𝒘(
&
𝒘)&
𝒘*
&
𝒘%
&
𝒘+
,
𝒘-
,
𝒘.
,
𝒘)
,
𝒘*
,
𝒘+
,
𝑎0" = 9
𝑑0" = 4
𝑎0
# = 1
𝑑0
# = 7
User Behaviors
App Embeddings
Retention
Installation
Uninstallation
Date Embeddings
Behavior Type
Embeddings
𝑎*" = 3
𝑑*" = 4
𝑎+" = 6
𝑑+" = 0
𝑎*
# = 7
𝑑*
# = 8
𝑎+
# = 3
𝑑+
# = 1
𝒆#+
𝒆#0
𝒆#*
𝒆"+
𝒆"0
𝒆"*
𝒆$
Input for Encoder
𝒙(*)
Figure 3: Embedding Layer for Transformer Encoder.
The date embeddings are the key to making the whole network
suitable for modeling user behaviors that are low-frequency and
unevenly distributed over time. Through date embeddings, the
subsequent transformer encoder directly receives the information
about when the behaviors happened rather than inferring it from
the order of behaviors. We denote the date embedding matrix as
Wd ∈RT ×dmodel , and date t is represented by wd
t ∈Rdmodel .
The behavior type embeddings help the model to distinguish
different types of user behaviors when integrating them all. For the
three user behavior types (retention, installation, and uninstalla-
tion), the embeddings are wx,wn,wl ∈Rdmodel .
Through this embedding layer, we construct the input represen-
tations for the transformer encoder, and the input includes complete
information about one’s mobile app usage.
Our encoder blocks share a similar basic structure with the ori-
gin transformer encoder [33], and to encourage the information
𝒘"
𝒘"
𝒘#
𝒘#
𝒘#
𝒘"
𝒘$
%
𝒘&%
𝒘'%
𝒘(%
𝒘)
%
𝒘$
%
𝑑+
" = 4
𝑑+# = 7
User
Embedding
Installation
Uninstallation
Date Embeddings
Behavior Type
Embeddings
𝑑)
" = 4
𝑑/
" = 0
𝑑)# = 8
𝑑/# = 1
𝒆4#/
𝒆4#+
𝒆4#)
𝒆4"/
𝒆4"+
𝒆4")
Input for Decoder
𝒆4
𝒆4
Figure 4: Embedding Layer for Transformer Decoder.
interaction among different types of behaviors, we make small
modifications to the multi-head self-attention mechanism. More
details are presented in Section 4.4. To better extract information
from user behaviors, inspired by the masked language model task in
BERT [9], we apply a masked app prediction task to installation and
uninstallation sequences. The weight matrix of the output softmax
is denoted by WΩ∈Rdmodel ×M. More details about this training
task are provided in Section 4.5.
Bottleneck Layer. The bottleneck layer is where (low dimen-
sional) user embeddings, denoted as e, are generated. As the encoder
and the decoder fuse in this layer, the compressed information from
original inputs becomes the source of information for reconstruc-
tion tasks.
On top of the final hidden vector eΩx , i.e., the representations
corresponding to the retention output by the transformer encoder,
we use a single hidden layer autoencoder to further reduce the
dimension from dmodel to demb. The activation function for the
bottleneck is tanh. Then the reconstructed input of this autoencoder
is fed to the transformer decoder part.
In the training scheme, we reconstruct one’s retention from her
user embedding with a multi-layer perceptron network and the
sigmoid activation function. The weight matrix of the output layer
is denoted as WΘ ∈Rdmodel ×M.
Transformer Decoder & Its Embedding Layer. The trans-
former decoder serves our purpose of reconstructing installation
and uninstallation in a non-autoregressive manner [12]. More con-
cretely, we use the date and the behavior type as queries to search
for valuable information from the user embedding to reconstruct
corresponding installed or uninstalled apps. For this purpose, we
design a new embedding layer for the transformer decode, shar-
ing date embeddings and behavior type embeddings with the em-
bedding layer of the encoder. Figure 4 shows the details of this
embedding layer and the input for the decoder.
To accomplish the task of reconstructing entire installation and
uninstallation sequences, we feed all hidden vectors, which is corre-
sponding to the installation and uninstallation, of this decoder into
an output softmax layer. The weight matrix of this layer is denoted
as WΦ ∈Rdmodel ×M.
4.3
Weight Matrix Settings
We carefully design our weight matrices for several parts of the
model, which helps to solve the sparsity problem and tightly cou-
ple the autoencoder part and the transformer parts. As shown in
Figure 5, the app embeddings are built based on both the app ID
App 𝑚
Category Social
App Embedding for 𝑚
App Lookup Table
Category Lookup Table
Figure 5: Illustration for App Embeddings
and its corresponding category ID. Even if the usage of some app
is gravely sparse, its category can still provide valid information.
This setting helps to overcome the problem of sparsity.
As introduced previously, we repeatedly use the M × dmodel
embedding matrix for apps, i.e., at the input and output of the
retention autoencoder, the input of the transformer encoder, the
output for the masked app prediction, the output of the transformer
decoder, as well as the reconstruction part for retention from the
user embeddings (bottleneck). We tie the weight matrices of all
these parts together, i.e.,
WΩ= WΘ = WΦ = W(4) = WaT.
(3)
We reduce the total number of parameters by tying weight matrices
of the above layers, which benefits of overcoming the problem of
sparsity. Moreover, weight tying benefits the backpropagation of
the gradient and speeds the convergence.
4.4
Modified Multi-head Self-attention
In our scenario, retention, bottleneck (user embeddings), instal-
lation, and uninstallation are heterogeneous. Each installation or
uninstallation represents a single operation, but the retention or
bottleneck is a cumulation of all the installation and uninstalla-
tion operations. Therefore, to better encourage the information
interaction among retention, bottleneck, and (un)installation, the
multi-head self-attention is modified, as shown in Figure 6.
Scaled Dot-Product Attention
Scaled Dot-Product Attention
Concat
Scaled Dot-Product Attention
Queries
Keys
Values
×
𝑊#
$
𝑊#
%
×
×
𝑊#
&
H headers
Retention for Encoder
Bottleneck for Decoder
Figure 6: Modified multi-head self-attention. It is applied in
both the transformer encoder and decoder.
By concatenating the retention (for the transformer encoder
part) or bottleneck (for the transformer decoder part) to each key
and value for the scaled dot-product attention, we enforce the infor-
mation interaction with retention or bottleneck in every attention
step. In this way, the transformer encoder fuses the information
from retention and (un)installation more efficiently, and the decoder
extracts information from the bottleneck better for reconstruction
tasks. This modification improves the quality of user embeddings,
as shown by the experimental results.
4.5
Multi-objective Joint Training Scheme
For model training, we apply a joint training scheme consisting of
three tasks, i.e.,
Task #1: Main Reconstruction. To generate general-purpose
user embeddings on basis of their behaviors on mobile app usage,
we train the proposed model to reconstruct all the retention, instal-
lation, and uninstallation information from the user embeddings.
This task is indispensable in the joint training scheme and can be di-
vided into two sub-tasks: (1) Reconstructing the retention data from
the user embeddings (bottleneck layer) by a multi-layer perceptron
network. We choose the sigmoid cross-entropy as the loss function.
(2) Reconstructing the installation and uninstallation sequences by
the transformer decoder. We calculate the loss of this sub-task by
averaging the softmax cross-entropy loss of every (un)installation.
The sum of the losses of these two sub-tasks is the loss of this main
reconstruction task, and we denote the loss as Lmain.
Task #2: Auxiliary Retention Reconstruction. This auxil-
iary task is for the autoencoder part. We also choose the sigmoid
cross-entropy as the loss function denoted as Laux.
Task #3: Masked App Prediction. This task is similar to the
“Masked LM” task in BERT [9]. We randomly mask apps in in-
stallation and uninstallation but keep the corresponding date and
behavior type. The transformer encoder is trained only to predict
the masked apps. For simplicity, we just follow the masking rate in
BERT and abandon the “random replacement or keep”. We calculate
the loss of this task, denoted as Lmask, by averaging the softmax
cross-entropy loss of every masked app.
The final loss function of our model is the sum loss of above
three tasks as well as the regularization loss, i.e., L = Lmain +
Laux + Lmask + Lreд. And Lreд is the ℓ2 norm regularization
loss for all the trainable parameters.
5
OFFLINE EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we demonstrate the offline performance of AETN
in generating general-purpose user embeddings. We compare the
baseline with four different versions of AETN in three typical down-
stream offline experiments. Then we show that the auxiliary re-
tention reconstruction task for the autoencoder part can help the
convergency of the transformer parts. Finally, we compare the user
embeddings generated by the baseline and AETN intuitively.
5.1
Dataset
We use real industrial data from Tencent for model training. Fol-
lowing the rules introduced in Section 3.1, we consider more than
10 thousand apps. Then we sample 20 million users and 500 million
records of installation and uninstallation dated from 2019.07 to
2019.12. We randomly split out about 5 million users for validation.
5.2
Models
We train and evaluate 5 models, including a baseline and 4 different
versions of AETN, as follows.
• DAE. Denoising autoencoder [34, 35] is widely applied for
unsupervised representation learning. We train it to generate
user embeddings based on user retention data.
• AETN w/o Lmask . A degenerated version of AETN trained
without the task of masked app prediction.
• AETN w/o Laux . Another degenerated version of AETN
trained without the auxiliary retention reconstruction task.
• V-AETN. The AETN with vanilla multi-head self-attention
proposed in [33].
• AETN. The complete version of the model which is intro-
duced in Section 4.
Details of model settings and hyper-parameter configurations
are listed in Appendix A.1. RNN-based models are not involved.
In addition to the uneven distribution of user behaviors, the low
efficiency of the training makes them infeasible in our scenario.
5.3
Offline Evaluation Tests
We conduct our offline experiments on three typical downstream
applications, including applications from both related domains and
a different domain. The evaluation tasks are as follows:
Test #1: Next Week’s Installation Prediction. This task is to
predict which users are going to install specific (niche) categories of
apps in next week. We collect data from about 5 million users and
then divide them into a training set, a validation set, and a testing
set in a 3:1:1 ratio. After generating user embeddings, we train
multi-layer perceptron networks to predict whether one would
install apps of four categories in next week.
Test #2: Look-alike Audience Extension. This is a common
task in computational advertising [29, 38]. We use a dataset con-
taining about half a million users with about 10% seed users for
an out-of-vocabulary niche app. Following the common practice,
we train XGBoost [5] look-alike models to evaluate different user
embeddings, and report the 10-fold cross-validation results.
Test #3: Feed Recommendation. To evaluate the universal
user embeddings in a cross-domain scenario, we use feed recom-
mendation data from the “Find” tab of Tencent Wi-Fi manager. We
select about 1.2 million users and extract their behaviors in 8 days,
then use the data from the first 7 days for training and the data from
the last day for validation and testing. The training set contains
about 27 million records, and the validation set and the testing
set contain approximately 2 million records, respectively. We train
Deep & Cross Networks [36] based on the generated user embed-
dings as well as other features for feed recommendations.
In all three tasks, we use the area under the ROC curve (AUC)
as the metric. We run each test 5 times and report the average.
5.4
Offline Evaluation Results
Table 1 shows the results in all three downstream experiments. We
can draw the following conclusions from the results.
All versions of AETN perform better than DAE. In next
week’s installation prediction, AETN brings an average AUC im-
provement by 0.0631 for all four categories. The rest two appli-
cations still enjoy improvements by 0.0134 and 0.0048. This is a
significant improvement for industrial applications where 0.1%
AUC gain is remarkable [26]. Such improvement confirms two hy-
potheses. Firstly, short-term user interests contained in installation
and uninstallation are valuable for various downstream applica-
tions, to different extent. Secondly, the proposed AETN is capable
of extracting long-term and short-term user interests from all types
of user behaviors and compressing them together into the user
embeddings.
Table 1: Offline evaluation results for user embeddings.
Model
Next Week’s Installation Prediction
Look-alike
Audience Extension
Feed
Recommendation
Category #1
Category #2
Category #3
Category #4
Average
DAE
0.7294
0.7297
0.7844
0.7132
0.7392
0.8175
0.6358
AETN w/o Lmask
0.7903
0.7818
0.8166
0.7743
0.7908
0.8290
0.6395
AETN w/o Laux
0.8024
0.7913
0.8196
0.7866
0.8000
0.8301
0.6403
V-AETN
0.8014
0.7924
0.8133
0.7746
0.7954
0.8307
0.6401
AETN
0.8026
0.7974
0.8215
0.7879
0.8023
0.8309
0.6406
The masked app prediction task makes an important con-
tribution to improve the quality of user embeddings. It brings
up an average AUC by 0.0115 in next week’s installation prediction.
Even for the look-alike audience extension and the feed recommen-
dation, the AUC lift brought by this task is over 0.0010. We owe this
to that the masked app prediction not only helps the transformer
encoder extract information more efficiently, but also brings a data
augmentation effect in the training process.
The modified multi-head self-attention performs better
than the vanilla one. The simple modification, which encour-
ages information interaction among retention, bottleneck, and
(un)installation, contributes an AUC gain of 0.0069 to the next
week’s installation prediction.
The auxiliary retention reconstruction also benefits the
quality of generated user embeddings. Without this auxiliary
task for the autoencoder part, the AUC in the next week’s instal-
lation prediction goes down by 0.0023. Besides the improvement
in user embeddings, we find that the training efficiency is also
improved by this auxiliary retention reconstruction.
5.5
Training Efficiency Comparison
When training AETN and AETN w/o Laux, we monitor the sum
of Lmain and Lmask on the validation dataset, to confirm the
improvement in training efficiency brought by the auxiliary re-
tention reconstruction. As shown in Figure 7a, the auxiliary task
makes the transformer parts in the AETN converge faster. With
the autoencoder and weight tying, gradients from the output layer
can be passed through fewer layers to the app embedding matrix.
Moreover, the complete version of AETN also achieves a lower loss
when both models eventually converge.
5.6
App Overlap between Neighbor Users
To intuitively compare the output embeddings by AETN and DAE,
we measure the overlap rate of apps between pairs of neighbor
users based on the embeddings. For each user, we choose the corre-
sponding user with the least Euclidean distance according to the
embeddings as the neighbor. We randomly sample 10 thousand
users and find their neighbors from 1 million randomly-selected
users. For each pair of neighbors, we calculate the overlap rate of
apps in retention, installation, and uninstallation. Figure 7b shows
the average results of all the neighbor pairs for both the AETN
embeddings and DAE embeddings. The results show that the AETN
succeeds in injecting information from installation and uninstal-
lation into user embeddings and maintaining the majority of the
2
4
6
8
10
12
epoch
10.5
11.0
11.5
12.0
12.5
13.0
loss
AETN
AETN w/o Laux
(a)
Retention
Installation
Uninstallation
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Rate
DAE
AETN
(b)
Figure 7: (a) Records for the sum of Lmain and Lmask on
validation dataset. Two models are trained with the same
settings except for the auxiliary retention reconstruction.
(b) The overlap rate of apps between 10 thousand pairs of
neighbor users.
Table 2: Online evaluation results for models with DAE em-
beddings and models with AETN embeddings.
Tab
Model
UV CTR
PV CTR
Engagement
Clicks
Good
Morning
+DAE
+1.26%
+2.23%
+2.27%
+2.11%
+AETN
+2.81%
+4.79%
+5.24%
+3.86%
Find
+DAE
+4.12%
+2.29%
+2.82%
+2.11%
+AETN
+4.15%
+5.96%
+8.14%
+3.23%
retention. At the same time, the DAE embeddings, which we ex-
tract only based on the retention information, cannot provide much
information regarding the installation and uninstallation.
6
ONLINE A/B TESTING
To further verify the effectiveness of the output user embeddings,
we conduct online feed recommendation A/B testing from 2020-
02-01 to 2020-02-10, in the “Good Morning” tab of Tencent Mobile
Manager and the “Find” tab of Tencent Wi-Fi Manager. We split
online A/B test traffic by userIDs evenly for the tested models. We
evaluate the base models, models with DAE embeddings, and mod-
els with AETN embeddings. The improvement results compared
with the base models are reported in Table 2.
We mainly consider the following metrics. UV CTR measures the
click-through rate in terms of the user view, and PV CTR measures
the click-through rate in terms of the page view. Engagement mea-
sures the average staying time of each user. Clicks measures the
average number of articles each user reads. From the table, we can
find that compared with the base models, all considered metrics
enjoy improvements by AETN embeddings, ranging from 2% to 8%.
Compared with DAE embeddings, PV CTR, and Engagement enjoy
more substantial improvements brought by the AETN embeddings,
and we hypothesize that AETN introduces the installation and unin-
stallation information, thus could capture short-term interests of
users in addition to the long-term interest from retention, and this
information is more critical to PV CTR and Engagement. Comparing
the results of the “Good Morning” tab and the “Find” tab, we can
find that the improvements in the “Find” tab are more significant.
It may be due to that users tend to read articles in the “Find” tab
all along the day, in contrast to the “Good Morning” tab where
users majorly read the news after getting up in the morning. The
exposure per user in the “Find” tab is significantly more. Therefore,
better modeling for user interests is even more critical.
7
DEPLOYMENT
We implement the model with Tensorflow [1]. It takes about 60
hours for training using 4 NVIDIA Tesla M40 GPUs. As the embed-
dings represent both long-term and short-term interests of users,
it is crucial to keep updating the embeddings for the best perfor-
mance. However, a large number of users bring challenges to update
frequently. Generally, we have two strategies for updating:
• Model Updating. We may update the model for the best per-
formance. This method takes into consideration the emerg-
ing apps with an utterly up-to-date app list and the distribu-
tion of the data. However, updating the model changes the
semantic structure of user embeddings completely. Thus, we
need to update all downstream models simultaneously.
• Feature Updating. We can also keep the model fixed and
only update the features of users. Thus we have the up-to-
date behaviors of users taken into consideration, and the
updated embeddings can still be in the same semantic space.
This strategy makes the updating less expensive.
In practice, we find that feature updating is more cost-effective
for downstream applications, which is because the apps usually do
not change drastically within a few months. However, updating the
embeddings for billion-scale users is still challenging. To reduce
computation, we only update the representations of active users of
downstream applications every day. This strategy can reduce the
number of users that need to be updated each time to the order of
millions. The model could be updated much less frequently. Once
the model is updated, we use a new feature ID to prevent confusion.
8
RELATED WORK
We summarize the related work in three fields, including applica-
tions with app behavior data, unsupervised feature extraction and
transformer networks.
8.1
Applications with App Usage Data
User behaviors on mobile apps usage contain rich preference in-
formation and have been used in a variety of applications [25].
The most significant of which is app install advertisements [11, 19]
and mobile app recommendations [39]. Yahoo posted a large scale
prediction engine for app install advertising based on a two-step
logistic regression model considering user features generated from
behaviors on apps [4]. For reducing sparseness, Yahoo also classi-
fies apps into predefined interest taxonomies when understanding
app usage patterns [31]. Usage patterns of apps are learned for app
purchase recommendations with a Deep Memory Network[10]. Be-
yond app install advertising, usersâĂŹ app-installation behaviors
are also used for news recommendations [22], where the knowl-
edge of the neighborhood of the cold-start users is transferred from
an APP domain to a new domain. A large survey on mobile app
user behaviors across main app markets around the world was
conducted to instruct cross-country app competitions and analyze
the challenges for software engineering [21].
In this paper, we address the real-life need of general-purpose
user embeddings based on user behaviors on app usage. The user
embeddings can be used for a variety of downstream applications.
8.2
Unsupervised Representation Learning
Unsupervised representation learning is a long-standing problem [3,
37], and autoencoders have been deployed successfully in many
real-world applications [2]. It follows an encoder-decoder struc-
ture and tries to reconstruct the input through a bottleneck layer.
Sparse autoencoders [23], denoising autoencoders [34, 35], vari-
ational autoencoders [30], adversarial autoencoders [28], and so
on, have been proposed as extensions. Recently, more advanced
unsupervised representation learning has been proposed, includ-
ing BERT [9] for natural language processing, and MoCo [13] for
computer vision, With a large amount of data and deep models,
unsupervised representation learning is able to achieve comparable
or even better performance with fewer annotations than traditional
supervised learning [9, 13].
In this paper, an unsupervised representation learning from user
behaviors on mobile apps is presented. We address the unique
challenges of this problem with the tailored autoencoder-coupled
transformer network, and demonstrate the effectiveness.
8.3
Transformer Networks
The transformer model was first introduced in [33], and has been
used widely for modeling sequences in natural language processing
tasks [9], recommendations [6, 32], and music generations [17].
Transformers can simultaneously attend to every token of their
input sequence with self-attention mechanism, and it is proved
that a multi-head self-attention layer with a sufficient number of
heads is at least as expressive as any convolutional layer [7]. Com-
pared with recurrent neural networks like long-short term mem-
ory (LSTM) [16], transformers are more parallelizable and require
significantly less time to train on large datasets [33]. Transformer-
XL [8] and reformer [18] are proposed to further reduce the com-
plexity when the length of sequences is very long, e.g., sequences
of length 10,000.
In this paper, we couple a transformer network with an autoen-
coder to model the retention, installation, and uninstallation col-
lectively. We modify the vanilla transformer in order to emphasize
the retention state or user embeddings when the installation and
uninstallation are being modeled.
9
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we present our recent practice for unsupervised user
embedding learning based on mobile app usage. To address the
unique challenges of this problem in the real system, we propose
a tailored model called AutoEncoder-coupled Transformer Net-
work (AETN). Extensive online and offline experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model. We also intro-
duce the details about the deployment. The output general-purpose
user embeddings can fertilize multiple downstream applications
that require user representations at Tencent. Now the output em-
beddings have been serving the feed recommendation scenes in
Tencent Mobile Manager and Tencent Wi-Fi Manager. In the future,
we plan to explore fine-tuning the transformer encoder part for
learning task-specific user embeddings.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the BlueWhale project team of
Tencent for supporting our research.
REFERENCES
[1] Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey
Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al.
2016. Tensorflow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In 12th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation. 265–283.
[2] Pierre Baldi. 2012. Autoencoders, unsupervised learning, and deep architectures.
In Proceedings of ICML workshop on unsupervised and transfer learning. 37–49.
[3] Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. 2013.
Representation
learning: A review and new perspectives. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence 35, 8 (2013), 1798–1828.
[4] Narayan Bhamidipati, Ravi Kant, and Shaunak Mishra. 2017. A large scale
prediction engine for app install clicks and conversions. In Proceedings of the 2017
ACM on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. ACM, 167–175.
[5] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system.
In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge
discovery and data mining. 785–794.
[6] Xusong Chen, Dong Liu, Chenyi Lei, Rui Li, Zheng-Jun Zha, and Zhiwei Xiong.
2019. BERT4SessRec: Content-Based Video Relevance Prediction with Bidirec-
tional Encoder Representations from Transformer. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia. 2597–2601.
[7] Jean-Baptiste Cordonnier, Andreas Loukas, and Martin Jaggi. 2020. On the
Relationship between Self-Attention and Convolutional Layers. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.
[8] Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime G Carbonell, Quoc Le, and Ruslan
Salakhutdinov. 2019. Transformer-XL: Attentive Language Models beyond a
Fixed-Length Context. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics. 2978–2988.
[9] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. 2019
Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (2019).
[10] Djordje Gligorijevic, Jelena Gligorijevic, Aravindan Raghuveer, Mihajlo Grbovic,
and Zoran Obradovic. 2018. Modeling mobile user actions for purchase recom-
mendation using deep memory networks. In The 41st International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 1021–1024.
[11] Jillian Gogel. 2018. AppsFlyer Forecasts Global App Install Ad Spend to Reach $64B
by 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2019 from https://www.appsflyer.com/blog/app-
install-ad-spend-predictions-2017-2020/
[12] Jiatao Gu, James Bradbury, Caiming Xiong, Victor OK Li, and Richard Socher.
2018. Non-autoregressive neural machine translation. In International Conference
on Learning Representations.
[13] Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. 2019. Mo-
mentum contrast for unsupervised visual representation learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.05722 (2019).
[14] Balázs Hidasi and Alexandros Karatzoglou. 2018. Recurrent neural networks
with top-k gains for session-based recommendations. In Proceedings of the 27th
ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. ACM,
843–852.
[15] Balázs Hidasi, Alexandros Karatzoglou, Linas Baltrunas, and D Tikk. 2016.
Session-based recommendations with recurrent neural networks. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.
[16] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural
computation 9, 8 (1997), 1735–1780.
[17] Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang, Ashish Vaswani Jakob Uszkoreit Noam Shazeer, and
Monica Dinculescu Douglas Eck. 2019. Music transformer: Generating music
with long-term structure. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
[18] Nikita Kitaev, Łukasz Kaiser, and Anselm Levskaya. 2020. Reformer: The Efficient
Transformer. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
[19] Joowon Lee and Dong-Hee Shin. 2016. Targeting potential active users for
mobile app install advertising: An exploratory study. International Journal of
Human–Computer Interaction 32, 11 (2016), 827–834.
[20] Jing Li, Pengjie Ren, Zhumin Chen, Zhaochun Ren, Tao Lian, and Jun Ma. 2017.
Neural attentive session-based recommendation. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. ACM, 1419–1428.
[21] Soo Ling Lim, Peter J Bentley, Natalie Kanakam, Fuyuki Ishikawa, and Shinichi
Hon