Learning Item-Interaction Embeddings for User
Recommendations
Xiaoting Zhao*, Raphael Louca*, Diane Hu, Liangjie Hong
Etsy, Inc
New York, U.S.A
{xzhao,rlouca,dhu,lhong}@etsy.com
ABSTRACT
Industry-scale recommendation systems have become a corner-
stone of the e-commerce shopping experience. For Etsy, an online
marketplace with over 50 million handmade and vintage items,
users come to rely on personalized recommendations to surface
relevant items from its massive inventory. One hallmark of Etsy’s
shopping experience is the multitude of ways in which a user can in-
teract with an item they are interested in: they can view it, favorite
it, add it to a collection, add it to cart, purchase it, etc. We hypothe-
size that the different ways in which a user interacts with an item
indicates different kinds of intent. Consequently, a user’s recommen-
dations should be based not only on the item from their past activity,
but also the way in which they interacted with that item. In this
paper, we propose a novel method for learning interaction-based
item embeddings that encode the co-occurrence patterns of not
only the item itself, but also the interaction type. The learned em-
beddings give us a convenient way of approximating the likelihood
that one item-interaction pair would co-occur with another by way
of a simple inner product. Because of its computational efficiency,
our model lends itself naturally as a candidate set selection method,
and we evaluate it as such in an industry-scale recommendation
system that serves live traffic on Etsy.com. Our experiments reveal
that taking interaction type into account shows promising results
in improving the accuracy of modeling user shopping behavior.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computer systems organization →Content ranking; Web
log analysis; Personalization; Query representation; Document repre-
sentation;
KEYWORDS
Embeddings, Candidate Set Selection, Recommendation
ACM Reference Format:
Xiaoting Zhao*, Raphael Louca*, Diane Hu, Liangjie Hong. 2019. Learning
Item-Interaction Embeddings for User Recommendations. In Proceedings
of DAPA 2019 WSDM Workshop on Deep matching in Practical Applications
(DAPA ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 4, 6 pages.
*These authors have equally contributed to this work.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
DAPA ’19, February 15th, 2019, Melbourne, Australia
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
1
INTRODUCTION
As online shopping becomes more prevalent, and inventory grows
at an exponential scale, customers have come to rely on person-
alized recommendation systems to understand their preferences
and surface relevant items to them. For Etsy, an online, handmade
marketplace with over 50 million active items, recommendation
systems become even more critical to helping customers identify
items of interest amidst Etsy’s vast breadth of one-of-a-kind listings.
One hallmark of Etsy’s shopping experience is the multitude of
ways in which a user can interact with an item they are interested
in: they can view it, favorite it, add it to a collection, add it to cart,
or purchase it. We hypothesize that the different ways in which
a user interacts with an item indicates different kinds of intent.
For example, a user who views an item must have different intent
than a user who adds the same item to their cart. Thus, the two
users should be shown different recommendations, despite the fact
that they both interacted with the same item. Figure 1a shows an
example target item, with potential recommendations for the user
who viewed that item (Figure 1b) versus for the user who carted that
item (Figure 1c). Not only are the recommendations different, but
the first shows recommendations that look more like substitutes to
the target item, while the second shows recommendations that are
more complementary.
In this paper, we propose a novel method for learning interaction-
based item embeddings that encode the co-occurrence patterns of
not only the item itself, but also the way in which a user inter-
acts with them. In contrast to previous applications of embedding
models, we learn multiple embeddings for each item, one for every
possible item-interaction pair. These learned embeddings give us
a convenient way of approximating the likelihood that one item-
interaction pair would co-occur with another during a shopping
session by way of a simple inner product. As such, we can predict
not only which items a user may be interested in, but also how they
will interact with them. Because of its computational efficiency, our
model lends itself naturally as a candidate set selection process: we
can generate user-specific candidate sets by finding items that lie
closest to the user’s past item-interaction activity in the embedded
space, as visualized in Figure 2.
Our proposed method can be seen as a generalization of using
co-occurrence counts, a popular approach for candidate set selec-
tion in the past [10, 11]. The underlying concept there assumes that
if a pair of items has been viewed or purchased together within a
short amount of time by the same user, there’s a good chance the
two items are related. However, this method (1) does not consider
the different ways in which a customer can interact with items, usu-
ally focusing only on co-purchases, and (2) requires items to have
been explicitly co-purchased together, leading to low coverage. Our
arXiv:1812.04407v1  [cs.IR]  11 Dec 2018
DAPA ’19, February 15th, 2019, Melbourne, Australia
Xiaoting Zhao*, Raphael Louca*, Diane Hu, Liangjie Hong
proposed method is more flexible and generalizes beyond explicit
co-occurrence counts, with the ability to give recommendations
along the lines of “Because you X this, you may also want to Y
that”, where X and Y are any interaction types.
We evaluate our model as a user-specific candidate set selection
method in an end-to-end production recommendation system that
serves live traffic on Etsy.com. We compare our model against a
live production system, which uses a co-occurrence based candi-
date set and provide both offline hit rate metrics, as well as online
key business metrics. Our experiments show that encoding inter-
action type in our item embeddings results in improved modeling
accuracy. It also allows for interpretable visualization of a user’s
shopping behavior and can serve recommendations that offer more
explainability. In the following sections, we describe related lines
of work (Section 2), describe the proposed model (Section 3), and
discuss offline and online experiment results (Section 4).
2
RELATED WORK
There are two broad areas of research that closely relate to our
line of work, namely (1) candidate set selection approaches and (2)
the application of neural embedding models to search and rank-
ing problems. To confine the scope of this discussion, we focus
particularly on the task of recommending items to users.
2.1
Candidate Set Selection
While candidate set selection has always been an important compo-
nent of large-scale recommendation systems, it is often overlooked
in favor of discussing the machine learned re-ranking model. Many
previous works depend on basic heuristics that measure goodness
of match between the user and items based on product category or
taxonomy matching schemes, or simple popularity rankings.
Beyond basic heuristics, co-occurring signals have been a popular
method for simple and efficient candidate set selection. Amazon
tracks pairs of items that are frequently co-purchased by the same
customers and constructs candidate sets by retrieving items that
have been frequently co-purchased with a customer’s last viewed
items [10]. Pinterest’s related pin recommendations system selects
candidate pins based on board co-occurrence, the number of times
a pin has been pinned to the same board [11]. Other candidate
set models include variations on the random walk [5], as well as
collaborative filtering or deep network approaches that incorporate
user’s historical interactions [4]. Another class of algorithms come
from IR, utilizing fast query-document retrieval engines to match
user and item features [1, 3]. While these methods are undoubtedly
successful, our candidate set selection method explicitly considers
the target item to generate candidate sets based on interaction type,
whereas other methods do not distinguish between target items in a
user’s past history. This allows our method to be more transparent
and interpretable to the user.
2.2
Neural Language Models
In its original form, neural language models such as continuous bag-
of-words (CBOW) and skip-gram (SG) models learn semantically
meaningful, low-dimensional representation of words by modeling
patterns of co-occurring words in sentences [13]. In recent years,
extending these neural embedding models to applications outside
of the NLP domain has been gaining in popularity, making appear-
ances in many domains including search, recommendations, and
e-commerce [6, 7, 9, 14]. Just as word embeddings can be trained by
treating a sequence of words in a sentence as context, item embed-
dings can be trained in a similar fashion by treating a sequence of
user actions as context and learning low-dimensional embeddings
for each item. Our proposed method is very similar to this line of
work; however, we explicitly model different types of interactions
in addition to the item itself.
3
PROPOSED METHOD
In the following sections, we describe a model that allows us to
efficiently encode the ways in which users interact with items, and
their co-occurrence relationships with other similar items. We show
how to learn multiple interaction-based embeddings for each item,
generate candidate sets, and produce recommmendations for users.
3.1
Item-Interaction Embeddings
Our proposed model is based on word2vec, a popular method in
natural language processing (NLP) for learning a semi-supervised
model to discover semantic similarity across words in a corpus
using an unlabelled body of text [13]. This is done by relating
co-occurrence of words and relies on the assumption that words
appearing together are more related than words that are far apart.
The same method can be used to model user interactions at
Etsy by modeling users’ journeys in aggregate as a sequence of
user engagements on listings, i.e., viewed, favored, add-to-carted or
purchased. Each user session is analogous to a sentence, and each
user action is analogous to a word in NLP word2vec parlance. This
method of modeling interactions allows us to represent items or
(a) Target item
(b) View-interaction embeddings
(c) Cart-interaction embeddings
Figure 1: Given a target item ℓshown in (a), we visualize the
top 5 nearest neighbors based on ℓ’s view-based embedding
(b) and ℓ’s cart-based embedding (c). One can see that the
recommendations for a user who has viewed item ℓshould
be different than the recommendations for a user who has
already carted item ℓ.
Learning Item-Interaction Embeddings for User Recommendations
DAPA ’19, February 15th, 2019, Melbourne, Australia
other entities (i.e., shops, users, queries) as low dimensional con-
tinuous vectors, where the similarity across two different vectors
represents their co-relatedness. Semantic embeddings are agnostic
to the content of items such as their titles, tags, descriptions, and al-
low us to leverage aggregate user interactions on the site to extract
items that are semantically similar.
Let L denote the set of items and I the set of interaction types
a user can have with an item (e.g., view, favorite, add-to-cart, pur-
chase). Each user’s visit on Etsy triggers a session S = {p1, . . . ,pk },
which consists of a sequence of item-interaction pairs pj ∈L × I.
For example, the sequence
(ℓ1, view), (ℓ2, favorite), (ℓ1, purchase)
specifies that a user first viewed item ℓ1, then favorited item ℓ2,
and lastly purchased item ℓ1. The training data consists of such
sequences collected from multiple users over a set period of time.
The skip-gram model uses a single item-interaction pair to pre-
dict the output of 2m neighboring pairs, where m is a hyperpa-
rameter of the model. In particular, given an item-interaction pair
pi ∈L × I, the probability of observing the pair pi+j is given by
P(pi+j | pi) =
u⊤pivpi+j
n
Õ
p=1
u⊤
pivp
,
−m ≤j ≤m,
(1)
where up,vp ∈Rd are the input and output vector representa-
tions of the pair p, repsectively and n is the number of unique
item-interaction pairs. Implicit in the skip-gram model is the as-
sumption that the dimension d << n. The objective is to maximize
the function
Õ
S ∈S
Õ
pi ∈S
Õ
−m≤j ≤m
P(pi+j | pi),
(2)
where S denotes the set of all sessions in the training data. It follows
from (1) and (2) that item-interaction pairs with similar contexts
will have “similar” vector representations. The objective function
is optimized using stochastic gradient ascent. In practice, however,
the computation of an optimal solution, can be computationally
expensive because the size of the ambient dimension space |L|×|I|
can be prohibitively large. To account for this, we use the negative
sampling approach proposed in [13]. We provide more details for
the approach we take to generate negative samples in section 4.1.1.
3.2
Candidate Set Selection
A crucial task for industry-scale recommendation systems is its
ability to quickly retrieve a small set of relevant items out of a large
set (potentially in the range of hundreds of millions) of candidate
items. This is necessary as it is computationally infeasible to apply
machine-learned models over the entire collection of candidate
items. In practice, this is referred to as the candidate set selection
phase, which aims to quickly prune irrelevant items while retrieving
items that are likely to be relevant to the user at low cost. The
smaller set is then re-ranked by a (typically, more sophisticated)
machine learning model.
The learned embeddings described above now give us a con-
venient way of encoding co-occurrence patterns between items
and the way users interact with them. A nice property is that the
Figure 2: Example of the item-interaction pair embedding
space. Given a user’s last action (e.g. viewed listing ℓ1), the
top K nearest neighbors should indicate which item the user
is likely to interact with, as well as how the user will interact
with it (e.g. the user may view items ℓ4 or ℓ5; cart items ℓ1 or
ℓ2; or purchase item ℓ3)
inner product between two such embeddings should approximate
the likelihood that one item-interaction pair would co-occur with
another. Because of its computational efficiency, it is easy to approx-
imate the affinity between tens of millions of pairs of embedding
vectors, lending itself naturally as a candidate set selection solution.
For example, to answer a question such as “since a user viewed on
item A, what is an item they may add to cart next?”, we can simply
find the nearest “cart” embedding to item A’s “view” embedding.
A user-specific candidate set can then be generated by finding the
closest listings to each of the user’s past item-interaction pairs in
the embedded space. Figure 2 explains this idea visually.
4
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we investigate the strengths and limitations of the
proposed approach and discuss evaluation results on a dataset of
browsing sessions from Etsy.
4.1
Dataset
The training data we use spans a one year period of visit log col-
lected from Nov 2017 to Oct 2018, and is extracted from implicit
feedback collected from users visiting Etsy during that period. In
particular, each training instance is defined by a user’s session and
consisted of a sequence of item-interaction pairs sorted chronologi-
cally. We restrict attention to sessions which had more than three
item-interaction pairs to eliminate bounces. The resulting dataset
has about 30 billion words from over 200 millions distinct tokens.
4.1.1
Negative Sampling. As discussed in section 3.1 the model we
propose uses the negative sampling approach introduced in [13] to
facilitate computational efficiency in model training and improve
DAPA ’19, February 15th, 2019, Melbourne, Australia
Xiaoting Zhao*, Raphael Louca*, Diane Hu, Liangjie Hong
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
view-interaction
cart-interaction
no-interaction
co-purchase
# of candidates
hpurchase
Figure 3: Comparison of average hit rates among different
candidate sets with the set of purchased items.
the quality of the low-dimensional vector representations. As the
initial step in the implementation of negative sampling, we define
the following partial order on the set of interactions we consider:
purchase > add-to-cart > favorite > view.
For each item-interaction pair p = (ℓ,i) of a given session S, we add
negative samples pj = (ℓ, j), for all interactions j > i, provided that
the pair pj < S. For example, if an item has been viewed and added-
to-cart, we associate with it a negative purchase. A natural drawback
of this approach is that it precludes the addition of negative samples
having view as an interaction. To account for this, we include two
negative pairs (ℓ1, view), (ℓ2, view), for each item ℓthat was only
viewed. The items ℓ1, ℓ2 are drawn uniformly at random from the
set of items belonging to the same taxonomy as ℓin order to capture
the user’s preference in the item viewed in said taxonomy.
4.2
Implementation Details
In order to support custom negative sampling, we used the fastText
library [2] developed by Facebook’s AI research lab, to train our
embedding models with extended functionalities built on top of
the existing library. The primary innovation from fastText is that
it enriches the word2vec model [13] with subword information by
adding a bag of character ngrams. We chose the framework in favor
of its easiness in extensibility as well as its efficiency in training. We
experimented with tunning several hyperparameters of the model
and eventually chose to set the context window to m = 5 and the
embedding dimension to d = 100 (cf. section 3.1). In addition to
the aforementioned custom negative samples, we also added five
random negative samples in each of our sequences.
After training, we use the approximate K-nearest neighbor search
algorithm, Hierarchical Navigable Small World [12] from Faiss (HNSW)
[8], in order to get the top k similar items for each learned item-
interaction pair. To balance efficiency with accuracy, we set the fol-
lowing hyperparameters in HNSW (efSearch = 256, efConstruction =
128, linksPerVector = 64) to scale up the approximated neighbor-
hood search over hundreds of millions item-interaction pairs from
our embedding training.
4.3
Offline Experiments
We test the performance of our model on data collected from shop-
ping sessions that start in the 24 hour window following the last
day of training.
4.3.1
Evaluation Methodology. We evaluate our candidate set se-
lection method by computing a hit rate, a metric similar to recall for
the candidate sets we generate. (We use hit rate as a metric instead
of the the more commonly-used AUC because the candidates we
generate are not necessarily present in historical data.) To do so,
we first fix a target interaction i, and an item-interaction pair p and
define the set
Hi
p B
(
(ℓ,q)
 p , (ℓ,i) ∈S, q =
Õ
S ∈S
qS(ℓ,i)
)
,
where qS(ℓ,i) ∈{1, 2, . . . } denotes the number of times item ℓ
had interaction i in session S. For example, if p = (ℓ, view) and i=
purchase, then Hip contains all items (with associated quantities)
purchased across all sessions after item ℓwas viewed. The hit rate
of the pth item-interaction pair is given by
hi
p B
|Hi
p |
Õ
j=1
qj1{ℓj ∈Cp }
, |Hi
p |
Õ
j=1
qj,
where, Cp denotes the candidate set of the pth pair produced by our
model and 1 is the indicator function. The average hit rate across
all item-interaction pairs for a target interaction i is given by
hi B 1
k
Õ
p ∈S
hi
p,
(3)
where k denotes the number of disctinct item-interaction pairs in
the test set.
4.3.2
Experimental Results. For offline experiments, we choose two
main models for candidate set generation for comparison: View-
Interaction, which generates a candidate set based only on the
“view-based” embeddings for a listing, and Cart-Interaction, based
only on “cart-based” embeddings for a listing. We compare these
methods with the following two baselines:
• Co-Purchase: This method represents each item as a co-
purchase vector, a sparse vector indicating other items that
have been co-purchased with it, similar to [10]. The candi-
date set is generated by finding the top K items with the most
similar co-purchase vectors as the target item. We chose this
as a baseline because it is the dominant candidate set selec-
tion method currently used in Etsy’s production systems.
• No-Interaction: This method learns a single embedding
for each item without differentiating between interaction
types, similar to [6]. The candidate set is also generated by
finding the top K items with the most similar embedding to
the target item.
In Figure 3, we plot the average hit rate defined in (3) for all
candidate set methods as a function of the number of candidates
in the set number of items in them when the target interaction is
a purchase. We observe that the candidate set associated with the
view-interaction model outperforms all other candidate sets, includ-
ing the co-purchase baseline when the number of items it contains
Learning Item-Interaction Embeddings for User Recommendations
DAPA ’19, February 15th, 2019, Melbourne, Australia
Test Target Interaction
Model
View
Cart
Purchase
(%)
(%)
(%)
View-interaction
201.90
198.11
207.10
Cart-interaction
-6.88
34.88
47.74
Co-purchase
76.89
179.70
129.60
Table 1: Percent change in hit rate compared to the model
with no-interactions for embedding vectors of dimension
d = 100 and candidate sets of size 200.
Model
Coverage Rate (% of active listings)
Items
Traffic
(%)
(%)
View-interaction
73.98
85.34
Cart-interaction
70.57
80.13
No-interaction
78.51
96.11
Co-purchase
9.43
42.83
Table 2: Target item coverage rate, based on distinct active
items and percent of traffic on one-day visit logs.
is sufficiently large. Although the view-interaction model under-
performs the co-purchase model for candidate sets with smaller
number of candidates, it is beneficial to explore additional items in
candidate selection as this can increase the average hit rate. Addi-
tionally, we observe in Figure 3 that the no-interaction model has
the smallest average hit rate among all other models. Therefore,
learning an embedding for item-interaction pairs instead of a single
embedding for each item has resulted in a candidate set which
contained more items that were eventually purchased.
In Table 1, we observe that the view-interaction model outper-
forms the no-interaction model as well as all other models for all
target interactions we consider. The cart-interaction model is shown
to outperform the no-interaction model only when the test target
interaction is either a cart or purchase action. However, it is not
shown to outperform the co-purchase baseline. We believe that this
is due to sparsity of add-to-cart interactions in our training data,
resulting in suboptimal embedding representations.
One disadvantage of relying on historical co-interactions (i.e.,
co-purchases) for candidate set selection is their relatively low
coverage rate. This is evident in Table 2, which shows that the
existing co-purchase baseline covers only 9.43% of active items. This
is due to stringent requirements for constructing such candidate
sets. For example, the co-purchase candidate set requires two or
more items to be purchased within a small time window. Such
critieria is hardly applicable for the majority of items at Etsy due to
the one-of-a-kind nature for the majority of the items. In addition,
low coverage is also evident in the size of the candidate set for
the co-purchase based candidate set (approximately 40 items). As
shown in Table 2, both the item-interaction and no-interaction
Embedding Dimension
Model
d = 25
d = 50
d = 75
(%)
(%)
(%)
View-interaction
-7.51
-1.31
-1.85
No-interaction
-12.95
-0.19
-0.16
Table 3: Percent change in hit rate for item-interaction em-
bedding models of different dimension compared to the
model using d = 100. The test interaction used is purchase
and the candidate set size is equal to 200.
methods cover at least 70% of distinct active items, which account
for more than 80% of Etsy’s traffic.
Table 3 shows performance metrics for the item-interaction and
no-interaction models as a function of the embedding dimension.
The numbers reported are average hit-rates for candidate sets with
200 items. For each embedding dimension,d ∈{25, 50, 75}, the table
shows its percent change in hit rate compared to its corresponding
model type with d = 100. In both model types, we observe a drastic
deterioration in performance for smaller dimension, d = 25. With
Etsy’s many one-of-a-kind listings,d = 25 is likely not large enough
to capture the variance. As a result, we see the hit rate for both
models improve as d increases. However, this marginal gain begins
to saturate as d > 100 as computation feasibility begins to decrease
model performance. Offline, we observe an almost linear trend in
training time and machine memory in dimension d.
4.4
Online Experiments
To further evaluate our candidate set selection methodology, we
implement and deploy the algorithm to a production user recom-
mendation module on the homepage of Etsy.com. We train an em-
bedding model based on Section 4.1.1 and generate candidate sets
for each user as described below.
A live A/B test was run for 7 days in which we bucketed 50%
of signed-in users into the control group, and the remainder into
the treatment group. The control group received a single module
that recommends items using a candidate set that matched items
based on the last 100 items that the user interacted with, regardless
of the interaction type. The treatment group received two separate
modules: The first module finds the closest item-interaction embed-
dings based on the last 4 items that the user had viewed; the second
module is computed similarly but is based on the last 4 items that
the user has added to cart. Figure 4 shows a visual description of
what the two variants look like.
Both the control and treatment groups used the same re-ranking
model on top of the candidate set selection phase, which has an
objective function that is optimized for predicting purchases, and
uses a variety of historical user and listing rates and content features.
We also note that while we prepared additional modules based on
favoriting and purchasing behavior, they were not deployed to the
live A/B test due to their lower-than-desired offline metrics.
The online A/B test evaluates an end-to-end system, which in-
cludes a combination of several factors, not only the choice of the
candidate set selection algorithm. These additional factors include:
DAPA ’19, February 15th, 2019, Melbourne, Australia
Xiaoting Zhao*, Raphael Louca*, Diane Hu, Liangjie Hong
(a) Control Group
(b) Treatment Group
Figure 4: Visual examples of the recommendations received
by users in the two buckets of our live A/B test, including: (a)
the control group, which used a co-purchase based candidate
set, and (b) the treatment group, which used the proposed
item-interaction embedding model. The single recommen-
dation module was split into two separate modules based on
the way the user interacted with past listings. This was pre-
ferred as it offers more explainability to the user.
the design for breaking up the original module into two separate
modules, the change of copy on the new modules, as well as the
effect of the re-ranker on top of the candidate set. As such, we look
at high-level business metrics to evaluate an end-to-end system
with potentially many confounding factors.
For this particular experiment, the metrics that we tracked in-
clude site-wide click-through-rate, conversion rate, and add-to-
cart rate. Given the preliminary experimental data, we observed
promising upward trend in many key metrics, although more data is
needed to gain statistical significance. Compared to the control, the
first module in the treatment (“Inspired by what you’ve viewed”)
showed 4.1% improvement in click-through-rate. Additionally, the
“treatment” group showed 0.20% and 0.31% increase in conversion
rate and checkout rate, respectively.
5
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we describe a model for learning interaction-based
item embeddings, which we use for candidate set selection. The pro-
posed method allows us to encode co-occurance patterns between
items and the way users interact with them. We train our model
on a large production dataset of browsing sessions from Etsy and
evaluate its performance both through offline metrics and online
experiments. We observe that the canidate sets produced by our
model improve upon the current production baselines.
REFERENCES
[1] Nima Asadi and Jimmy Lin. 2013. Effectiveness/efficiency tradeoffs for candidate
generation in multi-stage retrieval architectures. In Proceedings of the 36th in-
ternational ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information
retrieval. ACM, 997–1000.
[2] Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. 2017. En-
riching Word Vectors with Subword Information. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics 5 (2017), 135–146.
[3] Fedor Borisyuk, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, David Stein, and Bo Zhao. 2016. CaS-
MoS: A framework for learning candidate selection models over structured
queries and documents. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 441–450.
[4] Paul Covington, Jay Adams, and Emre Sargin. 2016. Deep neural networks
for youtube recommendations. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on
Recommender Systems. ACM, 191–198.
[5] Chantat Eksombatchai, Pranav Jindal, Jerry Zitao Liu, Yuchen Liu, Rahul Sharma,
Charles Sugnet, Mark Ulrich, and Jure Leskovec. 2018. Pixie: A system for
recommending 3+ billion items to 200+ million users in real-time. In Proceedings
of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference on World Wide Web. International World
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 1775–1784.
[6] Mihajlo Grbovic and Haibin Cheng. 2018. Real-time Personalization Using Em-
beddings for Search Ranking at Airbnb. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery &#38; Data Mining (KDD ’18).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 311–320. https://doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3219885
[7] Mihajlo Grbovic, Vladan Radosavljevic, Nemanja Djuric, Narayan Bhamidipati,
Jaikit Savla, Varun Bhagwan, and Doug Sharp. 2016. E-commerce in Your Inbox:
Product Recommendations at Scale. CoRR abs/1606.07154 (2016). arXiv:1606.07154
http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.07154
[8] Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. 2017. Billion-scale similarity
search with GPUs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08734 (2017).
[9] Krishnaram Kenthapadi, Benjamin Le, and Ganesh Venkataraman. 2017. Per-
sonalized Job Recommendation System at LinkedIn: Practical Challenges and
Lessons Learned. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM Conference on Recommender
Systems (RecSys ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 346–347. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3109859.3109921
[10] Greg Linden, Brent Smith, and Jeremy York. 2003. Amazon. com recommen-
dations: Item-to-item collaborative filtering. IEEE Internet computing 1 (2003),
76–80.
[11] David C Liu, Stephanie Rogers, Raymond Shiau, Dmitry Kislyuk, Kevin C Ma,
Zhigang Zhong, Jenny Liu, and Yushi Jing. 2017. Related pins at pinterest:
The evolution of a real-world recommender system. In Proceedings of the 26th
International Conference on World Wide Web Companion. International World
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 583–592.
[12] Yu A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin. 2016. Efficient and robust approximate nearest
neighbor search using Hierarchical Navigable Small World graphs. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.09320 (2016).
[13] Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. 2013.
Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In
Advances in neural information processing systems. 3111–3119.
[14] Dongjing Wang, Shuiguang Deng, Xin Zhang, and Guandong Xu. 2016. Learning
Music Embedding with Metadata for Context Aware Recommendation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 ACM on International Conference on Multimedia Retrieval (ICMR
’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 249–253. https://doi.org/10.1145/2911996.2912045
