Learning and Transferring IDs Representation in E-commerce
Kui Zhao, Yuechuan Li, Zhaoqian Shuai, Cheng Yang
Machine Intelligence Technologies, Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
{zhaokui.zk,yuechuan.lyc,wanqian.szq,charis.yangc}@alibaba-inc.com
ABSTRACT
Many machine intelligence techniques are developed in E-commerce
and one of the most essential components is the representation
of IDs, including user ID, item ID, product ID, store ID, brand ID,
category ID etc. The classical encoding based methods (like one-
hot encoding) are inefficient in that it suffers sparsity problems
due to its high dimension, and it cannot reflect the relationships
among IDs, either homogeneous or heterogeneous ones. In this
paper, we propose an embedding based framework to learn and
transfer the representation of IDs. As the implicit feedbacks of users,
a tremendous amount of item ID sequences can be easily collected
from the interactive sessions. By jointly using these informative
sequences and the structural connections among IDs, all types of
IDs can be embedded into one low-dimensional semantic space.
Subsequently, the learned representations are utilized and trans-
ferred in four scenarios: (i) measuring the similarity between items,
(ii) transferring from seen items to unseen items, (iii) transferring
across different domains, (iv) transferring across different tasks. We
deploy and evaluate the proposed approach in Hema App and the
results validate its effectiveness.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Neural networks; Learning
from implicit feedback; • Information systems →Electronic com-
merce;
KEYWORDS
Representation learning, Neural networks, IDs embedding, E-commerce
ACM Reference Format:
Kui Zhao, Yuechuan Li, Zhaoqian Shuai, Cheng Yang. 2018. Learning and
Transferring IDs Representation in E-commerce. In KDD ’18: The 24th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining,
August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3219855
1
INTRODUCTION
E-commerce has become an important part of our daily lives and
the increasing online shopping makes it a well-known concept.
However, we still have little knowledge about E-commerce because
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’18, August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5552-0/18/08...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3219855
it has much more dynamic and complex business environment
than traditional commerce. Fortunately, many data can be tracked
and collected from multiple sources in E-commerce and then ma-
chine intelligence techniques can help us to make more informed
decisions by analyzing and modeling these data. The intelligence
techniques allow us to gain deeper insights into customer behaviors
and industry trends, and subsequently make it possible to improve
many aspects of the business, including marketing, advertising,
operations, and even customer retention etc. One of the essential
elements of machine intelligence techniques is the representation
of data [5]. It is the fundamental step for intelligent techniques to
understand our world. In E-commerce, one important type of data is
the unordered discrete data and we usually call them IDs, including
user ID, item ID, product ID, store ID, brand ID and category ID etc.
The traditional technique treats IDs as atomic units and repre-
sents them as indices or one-hot encodings. The simplicity and
robustness make it very popular in statistical models. However, it
has two main limitations. Firstly, it suffers from sparsity problems
due to the high dimension. The size of the space spanned by N
different IDs is 2N . That means the samples we need to make the
statistical models have enough confidence increase exponentially
as the number of IDs increases. Secondly, it cannot reflect the rela-
tionships among IDs, either homogeneous or heterogeneous ones.
Taking two different item IDs as the homogeneous example, two
item IDs have a constant distance measured by one-hot encodings
no matter whether they are similar or not. Taking the item ID and
store ID as the heterogeneous example, the relationship between
them even cannot be measured since they are in different spaces.
Recently, word embedding (or called word2vec) techniques [23,
24], which are originated from the Natural Language Processing
(NLP) domain, have attracted a considerable amount of interests
from various domains. These techniques embed words into the low-
dimensional representation to capture syntactical and semantic
relationships among words. In E-commerce, the item ID is the core
interactive unit and a tremendous amount of sequences on it can be
easily collected from the interactive sessions, which are the implicit
feedbacks of users. Inspired by word2vec, item2vec [3] embeds
item IDs into the low-dimensional representation by modeling
the item ID co-occurrence in interactive sequences. The item2vec
techniques can be used to boost the accuracy of recommendation
[32] and search [2] in E-commerce.
In this paper, we extend the item2vec and present an embedding
based framework to learn and transfer low-dimensional representa-
tions for all types of IDs. Besides the implicit feedbacks of users, we
also consider the structural connections between item ID and other
types of IDs (as illustrated in Figure 1). Through these connections,
the information indicated in item ID sequences can propagate to
other types of IDs, and the representations of all types of IDs can be
learned simultaneously. In the proposed framework, all types of IDs
arXiv:1712.08289v4  [cs.LG]  22 May 2018
KDD ’18, August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom
Kui Zhao, Yuechuan Li, Zhaoqian Shuai, Cheng Yang
Figure 1: The item ID and its structural connections with
other types of IDs.
are embedded into one low-dimensional semantic space, where the
relationships among IDs, both homogeneous and heterogeneous
ones, can be measured conveniently. This property makes it very
easy to deploy and transfer the learned representations in real world
scenarios. With the assist of transfer learning [27], the information
contained in interactive sequences on item IDs can be leveraged in
many applications. We deploy and evaluate the proposed approach
in Hema App and the results validate its effectiveness:
• Measuring the similarity between items. Computing item-item
relationships is a key building block in modern recommen-
dation systems. We will see that measuring item similarities
by cosine distances among embedding vectors has a higher
recall score than the classical item-based Collaborative Fil-
tering (CF) algorithm.
• Transferring from seen items to unseen items. New items un-
avoidably cause cold-start problem, which means item IDs
with no historical records are invisible to the recommenda-
tion systems. In our work, approximate embedding vectors
are constructed for new item IDs by transferring the embed-
ding vectors of seen IDs. The experimental results show that
the constructed vectors are very encouraging.
• Transferring across different domains. For emerging platforms
like Hema, a high proportion of users are new customers,
and thus the personalized recommendation is very challeng-
ing. In our approach, embedding vectors of user IDs are
constructed by aggregating embedding vectors of item IDs.
We will see that these vectors can be transferred from long
existing platforms like Taobao, onto the emerging platforms
to provide effective personalized recommendation for new
users.
• Transferring across different tasks. Sales forecast is very help-
ful for making informed business decisions. When forecast-
ing the sales for different stores, it is important to properly
represent store IDs. We will see that the embedding vectors
of store IDs learned by our approach can be transferred to
this new task and they are more effective than the one-hot
encoding.
The rest of our paper is organized as follows. The service process
of Hema App is introduced in Section 2. We describe how to learn
the IDs representation in Section 3, and how to deploy and transfer
the IDs representation in Section 4. We present the experimental
setup and results in Section 5. We briefly review related work in
Section 6. Finally, the conclusions and future plans are given in
Section 7.
2
THE SERVICE PROCESS OF HEMA
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: An example of homepage on Hema App.
Hema App is an online-to-offline (O2O) service platform pro-
vided by Alibaba Group. As shown in Figure 2, customers can either
browse items by category or explore items in recommendation lists.
Unlike other online stores, Hema mainly focuses on fresh food,
where items are updated seasonally and thus many unseen items
arise frequently. Besides, Hema is an emerging platforms and a
large proportion of users are new customers. These factors make
the personalized recommendation very challenging on it. More-
over, it is very important to deliver the package in time due to the
fresh characteristic. So we need forecasting the delivery demand to
pre-order appropriate number of delivery staff.
In conventional recommendation framework, the Click Through
Rates (CTR) are calculated between users and items. However, it
is impossible to calculate and store CTR scores between all users
and all items since there are too many user-item pairs (usually in
size of 1015 −1020). In our work, the recommendation framework
is divided into four processes to overcome this challenge:
• Preparation. The user-to-trigger (u2t) preference scores
and the trigger-to-item (t2i) matching scores are calculated
offline, and the results are stored in key-key-value databases
for efficient online retrieving.
• Matching. For each user access, triggers are firstly retrieved
according to the user ID. Then a candidate set of recom-
mended items is obtained based on these tiggers.
• Filtering. Remove duplicated and invalid items, such as
sold-out items etc.
• Ranking. Rank filtered items according to an integrated
score, which considers preference score, matching score, and
other business objectives.
Learning and Transferring IDs Representation in E-commerce
KDD ’18, August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom
The size of candidate set and the amount of computation can
be controlled by setting the number of triggers, which makes the
entire framework much more flexible. In practice, various triggers
are used in the system, such as visited items, categories and so on.
3
LEARNING IDS REPRESENTATION
In this section, we discuss how to embed all types of IDs in E-
commerce into one semantic space. We explore both users’ interac-
tive sequences on item IDs and the structural connections among
different types of IDs.
3.1
Skip-gram on User’s Interactive Sequences
In E-commerce, item is the core interactive unit. We can obtain mas-
sive item ID sequences from different interactive sessions, which are
the implicit feedback of users. By regarding them as “documents”,
skip-gram model is to find the representations that are useful for
predicting the surrounding item IDs given the target item ID in a
sequence, which is illustrated in Figure 3. More formally, given a
sequence of item IDs {item1, . . . , itemi, . . . , itemN }, the objective
of the skip-gram model is to maximize the average log probability:
J = 1
N
N
Õ
n=1
1≤n+j ≤N,j,0
Õ
−C ≤j ≤C
logp(itemn+j |itemn),
(1)
where C is the length of context window.
Figure 3: The skip-gram model with context window of
length C = 2.
In the basic skip-gram model, p(itemj |itemi) is defined by the
softmax function:
p(itemj |itemi) =
exp(e′
j
Tei)
ÍD
d=1 exp(e′
d
Tei)
,
(2)
where e′ ∈E′(⊂Rm×D) and e ∈E(⊂Rm×D). E′ and E are matrices
corresponding to the context and target representations respec-
tively. m is the dimension of embedding vectors. D is the size of the
dictionary that contains all item IDs.
3.2
Log-uniform Negative-sampling
The computational cost of ∇logp(itemj |itemi) is proportional to D,
which makes it impractical when D is very large. Noise Contrastive
Estimation (NCE) assumes that a good model is able to differentiate
data from noise and subsequently approximates the log probability
of softmax [16, 25] with the means of logistic regression. While
the skip-gram model is only concerned with learning high-quality
vector representation, Mikolov et al. simplify NCE by negative-
sampling [24] and replace softmax function with
p(itemj |itemi) = σ(e′
j
Tei)
S
Ö
s=1
σ(−e′
s
Tei),
(3)
where σ(x) =
1
1+exp(−x) is sigmoid function and S is the number of
negative samples to be drawn from the noise distribution Pneg(item)
for each positive sample. While NCE requires both the sampling and
the numerical probability of noise distribution, negative-sampling
only needs the sampling.
The noise distribution Pneg(item) is a free parameter and the
simplest choice is the uniform distribution. However, the uniform
distribution cannot count the imbalance between rare and frequent
items. The popular item IDs appear in context window of many
target item IDs and such item IDs provide little information. In this
paper, we balance them with the log-uniform negative-sampling,
where negative samples are drawn from the Zipfian distribution
[29]. Zipfian distribution approximates many types of data in the
physical and social sciences, and items subject to it quite well. That
means the appearing frequency of any item is inversely propor-
tional to its rank in the frequency table. To further speed up the
negative-sampling procedure, we first sort items in decreasing or-
der of frequency and index them in range [0, D) according to their
ranks. Then we can approximate Zipfian distribution with
p(index) = log(index + 2) −log(index + 1)
log(D + 1)
.
(4)
The cumulative distribution function is:
F(x) = p(x ≤index)
=
index
Õ
i=0
log(i + 2) −log(i + 1)
log(D + 1)
= log(index + 2)
log(D + 1)
.
(5)
Let F(x) = r and r is a random number drawn from the uniform
distribution U (0, 1]. The sampling of Zipfian distribution can be
approximated by:
index = ⌈(D + 1)r ⌉−2.
(6)
By utilizing the above approximation, the log-uniform negative-
sampling is very computationally efficient.
3.3
IDs and Their Structural Connections
There are many types of IDs (as illustrated in Figure 1) and they
can be divided into two groups:
KDD ’18, August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom
Kui Zhao, Yuechuan Li, Zhaoqian Shuai, Cheng Yang
3.3.1
Item ID and its attribute IDs. Item is the core interactive
unit in E-commerce and it has many attribute IDs, including prod-
uct ID, store ID, brand ID and category ID etc. We here give a
brief illustration about them. The “product” is a basic concept, e.g.,
“iPhone X” sold in different stores shares the same product ID. When
one product is sold in several stores, it has a specific item ID in each
store (indicated by store ID). Each product belongs to some brand
(indicated by brand ID) and some categories (indicated by category
IDs). It is noteworthy that category IDs have many levels, such as
cate-level1 ID, cate-level2 ID and cate-level3 ID etc. Although many
other attributes IDs can be considered, we focus on seven types
of IDs in this paper without loss of generality. They are item ID,
product ID, store ID, brand ID, cate-level1 ID, cate-level2 ID and
cate-level3 ID.
3.3.2
User ID. A user can be identified by the user ID, such as
cookie, device IMEI, or log-in username etc.
3.4
Jointly Embedding Attribute IDs
By exploring the structural connections between item ID and its
attribute IDs, we propose a hierarchical embedding model to jointly
learn low-dimensional representations for item ID as well as its
attribute IDs. The architecture of the proposed model is shown in
Figure 4, where the item ID is the core interactive unit and it is
connected to its attribute IDs by dashed lines.
Figure 4: The architecture of our jointly embedding model.
Firstly, the co-occurrence of item IDs also implicates the co-
occurrence of corresponding attribute IDs, which is indicated by
solid arrows in Figure 4. Supposing there are K(k = 1, . . . ,K) types
of IDs in the first group (as mentioned in 3.3.1), let IDs(itemi) =
[id1(itemi), . . . , idk(itemi), . . . , idK(itemi)], where id1(itemi) equals
itemi, and id2(itemi) is the product ID, id3(itemi) is the store ID
and so on. Then we replace Eq. 3 with:
p  IDs(itemj)|IDs(itemi)
=σ
 K
Õ
k=1
(wjke′
jk)T(wikeik)
!
S
Ö
s=1
σ
 
−
K
Õ
k=1
(wske′
sk)T(wikeik)
!
,
(7)
where e′
·k ∈E′
k(⊂Rmk ×Dk ) and e·k ∈Ek(⊂Rmk ×Dk ). E′
k and
Ek are matrices that correspond to the context and target repre-
sentations of type k(k = 1, . . . ,K) respectively. For type k, mk is
the dimension of its embedding vectors and Dk is the size of its
dictionary. Note that different types of IDs can be embedded into
different dimensions. The scalar wik is the weight of idk(itemi). As-
suming each item contributes equally to idk(itemi) and idk(itemi)
contains Vik different items, it is reasonable to let wik be inversely
proportional to Vik. More formally, we have
I(x) =
0
,x is False
1
,x is True ,
(8)
Vik =
D
Õ
j=1
I  idk(itemi) = idk(itemj) ,
(9)
wik =
1
Vik
(k = 1, . . . ,K).
(10)
For instance, wi1 = 1 as each id1(itemi) contains exactly one item,
and wi2 = 1
10 if product ID(itemi) contains ten different items.
Secondly, structural connections between the item ID and at-
tribute IDs mean constraints, e.g., the vectors of two item IDs should
be close not only for their co-occurrence but also for their sharing
the same product ID, store ID, brand ID or cate-level1 ID etc. Con-
versely, attribute IDs should assimilate the information contained
in corresponding item IDs. Taking store ID as an example, the em-
bedding vector of a specific store ID should be the proper summary
of all item IDs sold in it. Consequently we define:
p(itemi |IDs(itemi)) = σ
 K
Õ
k=2
wikeT
i1Mkeik
!
,
(11)
where Mk ⊂Rm1×mk (k = 2, . . . ,K) is the matrix that transforms
embedding vector ei1 into the same dimension with embedding
vector eik. Then we maximize the following average log probability
instead of Eq. 1:
J = 1
N
N
Õ
n=1
©­
«
1≤n+j ≤N,j,0
Õ
−C ≤j ≤C
logp(IDs(itemn+j)|IDs(itemn))
+α logp(itemn|IDs(itemn)) −β
K
Õ
k=1
||Mk ||2
!
,
(12)
where α is the strength of constraints among IDs and β is the
strength of L2 regularization on transformation matrices.
Our approach embeds the item ID and its attribute IDs into one
semantic space, which is a useful property for deploying and trans-
ferring these representations in real world scenarios. As the proper-
ties of item ID and its attribute IDs remain stable for a relative long
time, the jointly embedding model and the learned representations
are updated weekly in our work.
3.5
Embedding User IDs
The user preferences can be reflected from their interactive se-
quences of item IDs, and thus it is reasonable to represent the user
IDs by aggregating embedding vectors of the interactive item IDs.
There are many methods to aggregate item embedding vectors,
e.g. Average, RNN etc. [26], and Average is chosen in our work.
Learning and Transferring IDs Representation in E-commerce
KDD ’18, August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom
Since the preferences of users in Hema change quickly, the em-
bedding vectors of user IDs should be updated frequently (such
as updated daily), to immediately reflect the latest preference. Un-
like the RNN model, which needs the training procedure and is
very computational expensive, Average is able to learn and update
representations in short periods of time.
For user u ∈U , let Su = [item1, . . . , itemt, . . . , itemT ] denote
the interactive sequence, where the recent T item IDs are arranged
in reverse chronological order. We construct the embedding vector
for user u by:
Embedding(u) = 1
T
T
Õ
t=1
et,
(13)
where et is the embedding vector of itemt .
3.6
Model Learning
Optimizing the jointly embedding model is equivalent to maximiz-
ing the log-likelihood given by Eq. 12, which is approximated by
log-uniform negative-sampling (as shown in Eq. 7). To solve the
optimization problem, we first initialize all trainable parameters
using “Xavier” initialization [12]. After that we apply the Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm to J with shuffled mini-batches.
The parameters are updated through back propagation (see [13]
for its principle) with Adam rule [17]. To exploit the parallelism
of operations for speeding up, we train our neural network on the
NVIDIA-GPU with Tensorflow [1].
The hyper-parameters in our model are set as follows: the length
of the context window is C = 4; the number of negative samples is
S = 2; the embedding dimensions are [m1,m2,m3,m4,m5,m6,
m7] = [100, 100, 10, 20, 10, 10, 20]; the strength of constraints is
α = 1.0; the strength of L2 regularization on transformations is
β = 0.01; the batch size is 128 and the neural network is trained for
5 epochs.
4
DEPLOYING IDS REPRESENTATION
The low-dimensional representations learned by our approach can
be effectively deployed in many applications in E-commerce. In this
section, we give four real-world examples in Hema App.
4.1
Measuring Items Similarity
Computing item-item relationships is a key building block in mod-
ern recommendation systems. These relationships are extensively
used in many recommendation tasks. One classic task is “People
also like”, in which similar items are recommended to users based on
the item they are viewing. Most online stores, e.g., Amazon, Taobao,
Netfix and iTunes store etc., provide similar recommendation lists.
Another classic task is to prepare for user-item recommendations,
where Click Through Rates (CTR) are calculated between users
and items (as mentioned in Section 2). One typical choice of trig-
ger is visited items and the candidate set is constructed based on
item-item similarities. Given user u, we take the items interacted
by u in recent past as the seed set (denoted by SEED(u)). For each
seedi ∈SEED(u), we take into account its top-N similar items and
the candidate set for user u is:
candidate(u) =
Ø
seedi ∈SEED(u)
(top-N similar items of seedi). (14)
The item-based Collaborative Filtering (CF) [21, 30] is a famous
method of calculating item-item similarities. It calculates similarity
scores using user-item interactions. However, user-item relation-
ships are not always available. A large proportion of interactions in
online shopping has no explicit user identification. Instead, the ses-
sion identification is available in most situations. We will see that
measuring item similarities by cosine distances among embedding
vectors has a higher recall score than the classical item-based CF
algorithm. In practice, by integrating the new similarities into orig-
inal scores calculated by CF algorithm, the performance of online
recommendation system is significantly improved.
4.2
Transferring from Seen Items to Unseen
Items
New items cause the cold-start problem, which means item IDs
with no historical records are invisible to recommendation systems
[31]. Many existing methods cannot process new items, including
item-based CF and original item2vec [3] etc. Several content-based
approaches are proposed to address this problem, such as image-
based [22] and text-based [35] recommendations. In this paper, we
propose a new method to relieve the cold-start problem on unseen
items, where an approximate embedding vector is constructed for
the new item ID. It is facilitated by the measurability of relationships
among heterogeneous IDs.
The basic idea is that IDs connected to the new item ID usually
have historical records. For instance, given a new item, its corre-
sponding product is likely sold elsewhere and the corresponding
store has already sold other items. Therefore we can construct an
approximate embedding vector for the new item ID from the em-
bedding vectors of IDs connected to it. Since σ is a monotonically
increasing function, we can derive Eq. 11 as following:
p(itemi |IDs(itemi))
= σ
 K
Õ
k=2
wikeT
i1Mkeik
!
∝
K
Õ
k=2
wikeT
i1Mkeik
= eT
i1
 K
Õ
k=2
wikMkeik
!
.
(15)
Maximizing the log-likelihood given by Equation 12 leads to
p(itemi |IDs(itemi)) →1 and thus it is reasonable to approximate
ei1 according to:
p(itemi |IDs(itemi)) →1
⇒eT
i1
 K
Õ
k=2
wikMkeik
!
is relatively large
⇒ei1 ≈
K
Õ
k=2
wikeT
ikMT
k .
(16)
We here assume every connected idk(k = 2, . . . ,K) has historical
records for simplicity. In practice, we only take into account the idk
which has historical records. Actually, the more connected IDs are
KDD ’18, August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom
Kui Zhao, Yuechuan Li, Zhaoqian Shuai, Cheng Yang
taken into account, the better approximation we can get. The ex-
perimental results show that the constructed vector
KÍ
k=2
wikeT
ikMT
k
is very encouraging.
4.3
Transferring across Different Domains
For emerging platforms like Hema, a high proportion of users are
new customers, and thus the personalized recommendation is very
challenging. In this work, we transfer the preferences of users
on long existing platforms (source domain), onto the emerging
platform (target domain) to overcome this challenge. Since Taobao
covers the majority of E-commerce users in China, we select it as
the source domain.
Figure 5: The process of transferring user vectors across dif-
ferent domains.
Let U s and U t denote the user set in source domain and target
domain respectively, and let U i denote their intersection U s ÑU t .
The overall process is shown in Figure 5. Firstly, user vectors for U s
are calculated via aggregating embedding vectors of the interactive
item IDs in Taobao, which is detailed in Section 3.5. Secondly, based
on the similarities measured by embedding vectors, users in U i
are clustered into 1000 groups by k-means. Thirdly, for each group,
the top N most popular Hema items within it are selected as the
candidate set. Fourthly, the new coming user in U s \U t is assigned
to the most similar group according to the similarities between the
user vector and the group centers. Finally, taking assigned group
as the trigger, corresponding candidate set is recommended to the
new user after being filtered and ranked accordingly.
There are two alternative aggregating manners: naive average
and weighted average. In the weighted average, different interactive
items have different weights:
wt =
Õ
u′∈U i
IA(u′, itemt ),
IA(x) =
 0,
u′ has no interaction on itemt
Aj,
u′ has interaction j on itemt
.
(17)
In this way, the items that are similar to items in the target domain
have higher weights. The Aj for different types of interactions
are tuned by online experiments, e.g. purchase is more heavily
weighted than click. Subsequently for user u ∈U s, the embedding
vector in Eq. 13 is extended to:
Embedding(u) =
ÍT
t=1 wtet
ÍT
t=1 wt
.
(18)
We will see that even naive average brings significant improve-
ment, and weighted average further amplifies the improvement.
4.4
Transferring across Different Tasks
Sales forecast is very helpful for making informed business deci-
sions in E-commerce. It can help to manage the workforce, cash
flow and resources, such as optimizing the delivery process. We
here consider the problem of forecasting the delivery demand of
each store per 30 minutes in the next day. The forecast results can
guide us to pre-order appropriate number of delivery staff.
The value of sales forecast depends on its accuracy and inaccu-
rate forecasts deteriorate decision efficiency. Ordering too many
delivery staff leads to manpower waste and ordering insufficient
delivery staff causes that orders cannot be delivered in time. Typical
forecast techniques take historical sales data as input. However, the
store ID is also very useful since different stores follow different
patterns, and the forecasting model should be able to distinguish
them. One classical way to consider store ID is one-hot encoding,
which treats store IDs as atomic units. Although the simplicity and
robustness make it very popular in statistical models, it has several
limitations, as mentioned in Section 1.
In this paper, we use the embedding vectors learned by our
model to represent store IDs. To forecast the delivery demand, we
take both historical sales data and embedding vectors as the input.
Following the input layer, several full connections with activation
function are used to extract high order representations. Formally,
let h0 denote the input layer, then the output of each hidden layer
i(i = 1, . . . , N) is:
hi = a(Wihi−1 + bi).
(19)
The element-wise activation function a(·) makes the network ca-
pable of learning non-linear functions. In practice, we choose the
ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit defined as max(0, x)) due to its sim-
plicity and computing efficiency. Wi is the affine transformation
of hidden layer i and bi is the corresponding bias term. After all
hidden layers, we use the linear regression to forecast the delivery
demand ˆyi:
ˆyi = wT hN + b.
(20)
We train the model to minimize the Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
and the learning details are similar to Section 3.6. We will see that
these embedding vectors are more effective in representing stores
than the one-hot encoding.
5
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we present the empirical evaluation of our approach
in real-word scenarios of Hema App.
5.1
Measuring Items Similarity
The item-item similarities are extensively used in many recommen-
dation tasks, including “People also like” and CTR prediction etc.
The similarity between two item IDs can be measured by the cosine
similarity between their vectors:
sim(itemi, itemj) = cos(vi, vj) =
vT
i vj
||vi ||2 · ||vj ||2
.
(21)
When training our model, historical interaction data in the past
14 days are used. We construct the candidate set for each user ui
as described in Section 4.1, and measure the offline performance
of different methods by the click recall@top-N of the generated
Learning and Transferring IDs Representation in E-commerce
KDD ’18, August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom
candidate set in the next day:
recall@top-N =
Í
ui #{hits in top-N}ui
Í
ui #{total clicks}ui
.
(22)
Given a user ui, the term #{hits in top-N}ui denotes the number
of clicked items hit by candidate set and the term #{total clicks}ui
denotes the total number of clicked items.
Table 1 shows the experimental results about click recall@top-N
of two methods. As we can see, the low-dimensional embedding
methods outperform item-based CF method [21, 30] significantly,
especially when N is small. The reason is that item-based CF needs
explicit user-item relationships and they are not always available.
Instead of explicit user identification, the available information is
session identification and skip-gram on the interaction sequence
can take advantage of all data. A noticeable phenomenon is that
the recall@top-N over the weekend is higher than the weekday,
which is consistent with the experiences in our daily life.
To get a better understanding about the improvements, we uni-
formly divide all items from the weekend dataset into 10 popularity
levels according to their frequencies of interactions. After that
we calculate the click recall@top-1000 at each level and show the
experimental results in Table 2. Although unpopular items have
few explicit user-item relationships, they appear in a considerable
number of interaction sequences. Therefore embedding methods
achieve better results, whereas the item-based CF method cannot
deal with unpopular items very well.
In the online recommendation system, by integrating the new
similarities into original scores calculated by CF algorithm, the final
recall increases by 24.0%.
5.2
Transferring from Seen Items to Unseen
Items
New items cause cold-start problem, and many methods cannot
process them. We attempt to relieve the cold-start problem by con-
structing an approximate embedding vector for the new item ID.
Since item-based CF cannot perceive item IDs with no historical
records, we compare our approximation to the baselines where
candidate sets consist of random or hot item IDs. We measure the
performance of different methods by the click recall@top-N of the
generated candidate set in the next day.
Table 3 shows the experimental results about click recall@top-N
of baselines and our method. As we can see, the performance of
constructed vectors is competitive. Considering that the classic
item-based CF cannot deal with new item IDs at all, our approach
is very encouraging. The recall@top-N on the weekend is higher
than the weekday, which is similar to Section 5.1.
On closer inspection, when N is less than 50 the click recall is
comparable to that using item ID embedding vectors directly. When
N is beyond 50, few improvements can be achieved. That reveals the
limitation of our approach: the approximation is accurate when N is
small and the approximation becomes inaccurate while N increases.
In practice, the problem brought by this limitation is negligible
in that the number of items we can recommend to a user is very
limited.
5.3
Transferring across Different Domains
Since new users have no historical records, it is impossible to eval-
uate different methods offline. Instead, we conduct an A/B test over
one week and three methods are compared:
• Hot. The baseline is recommending the same list containing
hot items to each new user.
• Naive average. Through transferring the preferences of
users on Taobao to Hema, personalized recommendation is
provided to each new user. In this method, the user vector is
generated by naive average.
• Weighted average. When generating user vectors, different
weights are here assigned to different interactive items and
the weighted average is adopted.
Performances of different methods are evaluated by Pay-Per-
Impression (PPM). Compared to the baseline, the naive average
increased PPM by 71.4% and the weighted average increased PPM
by 141.8%. The significant improvements demonstrate that user
embedding vectors learned by our approach can be effectively trans-
ferred across different domains to overcome the cold-start problem
brought by new users.
5.4
Transferring across Different Tasks
We here consider the problem of forecasting the delivery demand
of each store per 30 minutes on the next day. The forecast results
can guide us to pre-order appropriate number of delivery staff. We
compare our embedding vectors against several baselines:
• HISTORY. The typical forecast techniques take historical
sales data as the input. For every 30-minute interval of each
store, the input contains the delivery demands in the same
time interval on the recent 7 days.
• HISTORY with ONE-HOT. The store ID is also very useful
since different stores follow different patterns. One classical
way to consider store ID is one-hot encoding, which treats
store IDs as atomic units. Besides the historical data, we here
also take the one-hot encoding as part of the input.
• HISTORY with VEC. One-hot encoding has several limita-
tions, such as sparsity and similarity immeasurability etc. We
represent the store ID using the embedding vector learned
by our embedding model and take it as part of the input
instead of one-hot encoding.
There are five full connection layers of size 128 in every alterna-
tive methods. We measure the performance of different methods
by the Relative Mean Absolute Error (RMAE):
RMAE =
ÍN
i=1 |yi −ˆyi |
ÍN
i=1 yi
,
(23)
where yi is the true delivery demand and ˆyi is the forecasted de-
livery demand. Note that it is different from the Mean Absolute
Percentage Error (MAPE). RMAE actually is an equivalent variety
of MAE since ÍN
i=1 yi is a constant for a certain dataset.
The RMAE scores of different methods in forecasting delivery
demand are shown in Table 4. We repeat the experiment on 3
different days to confirm the improvement. As we can see, the
store IDs are very useful and even one-hot encoding can bring
improvements. However, one-hot encoding is plagued by its sparsity
KDD ’18, August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom
Kui Zhao, Yuechuan Li, Zhaoqian Shuai, Cheng Yang
Table 1: The click recall@top-N of all methods (higher is better).
top-N
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1000
weekday
CF
2.46%
4.46%
6.07%
7.44%
8.66%
9.82%
10.88%
11.82%
12.69%
13.49%
29.83%
ITEM2VEC
4.72%
7.46%
9.43%
11.00%
12.35%
13.53%
14.16%
14.73%
15.26%
15.74%
30.35%
weekend
CF
3.44%
6.18%
8.46%
10.39%
12.12%
13.65%
15.05%
16.32%
17.49%
18.57%
42.33%
ITEM2VEC
6.49%
10.42%
13.29%
15.58%
17.48%
19.04%
19.81%
20.55%
21.23%
21.88%
43.34%
Table 2: The click recall@top-1000 of all methods at different popularity levels (higher is better).
popular-level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
CF
22.67%
31.53%
36.81%
39.85%
43.17%
46.72%
47.22%
47.50%
45.85%
58.27%
ITEM2VEC
25.13%
40.44%
45.02%
47.14%
49.33%
51.34%
49.70%
49.72%
47.99%
48.97%
Table 3: The click recall@top-N of baselines and constructed vectors (higher is better).
top-N
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1000
weekday
RANDOM
0.01%
0.01%
0.02%
0.03%
0.04%
0.04%
0.05%
0.06%
0.07%
0.07%
0.53%
HOT
1.60%
2.46%
3.19%
3.77%
4.36%
4.83%
5.39%
5.86%
6.39%
6.97%
27.67%
NEW2VEC
4.56%
7.05%
8.73%
9.94%
10.88%
11.63%
11.75%
11.87%
11.99%
12.11%
16.95%
weekend
RANDOM
0.00%
0.01%
0.02%
0.03%
0.04%
0.05%
0.06%
0.07%
0.08%
0.08%
0.70%
HOT
1.69%
2.51%
3.19%
3.79%
4.35%
4.83%
5.42%
6.00%
6.53%
7.13%
27.75%
NEW2VEC
6.26%
9.86%
12.27%
14.02%
15.33%
16.37%
16.47%
16.56%
16.66%
16.75%
21.89%
Table 4: The RMAE scores of different methods in forecast-
ing delivery demand (lower is better).
dataset
day 1
day 2
day 3
HISTORY
43.23%
40.75%
34.26%
HISTORY with ONE-HOT
42.57%
39.00%
34.57%
HISTORY with VEC
40.95%
33.75%
33.02%
and distance unavailability. The embedding vectors of store IDs
learned by our embedding model can overcome those limitations.
By taking full advantage of the information contained in store IDs,
our model achieves much more improvements.
6
RELATED WORK
Many machine intelligence techniques, such as recommendation
[8] and forecast [4] etc., are developed to handle the dynamic and
complex business environment in E-commerce. The performance
of these intelligence techniques is heavily dependent on the data
representation and thus representation learning has been a very
popular topic for a while [5]. Recently, many works focus on a
specific family of representation learning methods, namely neural
networks (or deep learning). It is inspired by the nervous system
and consists of multiple non-linear transformations. Representation
learning with neural networks has brought remarkable successes
to both academia and industry [7, 14, 18].
The unordered discrete data (or called IDs) is one of the most
important types of data in many scenarios. The word in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) is a typical example of IDs. Traditional
techniques treat them as atomic units and represent them as indices
or one-hot encodings. This simple and robust choice has many limi-
tations, including sparsity and distance unavailability. To overcome
these limitations, low-dimensional distributed representations are
proposed, which can be traced back to the classical neural network
language model [6]. They jointly learn the word embedding vector
and the statistical language model with a linear projection layer and
a non-linear hidden layer. It was later shown that word embedding
vectors significantly improve and simplify many NLP applications
[10, 11]. However, the original neural network language model
is very computationally expensive since it involves many dense
matrix multiplications. Mikolov et al. introduced the skip-gram
model [23] (also well-known as word2vec), which predicts the sur-
rounding context words given the target word to avoid many dense
matrix multiplications. Although word2vec is very efficient to learn
high-quality embedding vectors of words, Mikolov et al. used the
negative-sampling to approximate full softmax to reduce the com-
putation further [24]. Their works have been followed by many
others. Le et al. developed an algorithm to represent each document
with a vector by training a language model to predict words in the
document [19]. Li et al. [20] and Yamada et al. [34] both jointly
map words and entities (from the knowledge base) into the same
semantic vector space.
Embedding techniques have drawn many attentions from vari-
ous domains beyond the original NLP domain. Perozzi et al. [28],
Tang et al. [33] and Grover et al. [15] established an analogy for
networks by representing a network as a “document”. They sample
Learning and Transferring IDs Representation in E-commerce
KDD ’18, August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom
sequences of nodes from the underlying network and turn a net-
work into an ordered sequence of nodes. In E-commerce, Oren et al.
proposed item2vec [3] to embed item IDs into the low-dimensional
representation by modeling item ID co-occurrence in user’s inter-
active sequences. Sun et al. [32] jointly learned user ID and item ID
embedding vectors from a multi-level item category organization
for personalized ranking in recommendation. Ai et al. [2] jointly
learned distributed representations for query ID, item ID and user
ID for personalized product search. Benjamin Paul et al. [9] modeled
customer life time value based on user embedding.
7
CONCLUSION
The unordered discrete ID is one of the most important types of
data in many scenarios. In this paper, we propose an embedding
based framework to learn and transfer low-dimensional represen-
tations for all types of IDs in E-commerce, including user ID, item
ID, product ID, store ID, brand ID and category ID etc. Besides
co-occurrence of item IDs in user’s implicit interactions, we also
consider the structural connections among different types of IDs.
Then all types of IDs are embedded into one semantic space and
these low-dimensional representations can be effectively used in
many applications. We deploy and evaluate the proposed approach
in several real-world scenarios of Hema App, and the results vali-
date its effectiveness. We plan to continue improving our approach
and extend it to many other applications, such as search engines,
advertisements and so on.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Chi Zhang, Zhibin Wang, Xiuyu
Sun, Hao Li for discussions and supports.
REFERENCES
[1] Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey
Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al.
2016. TensorFlow: A System for Large-Scale Machine Learning.. In OSDI, Vol. 16.
265–283.
[2] Qingyao Ai, Yongfeng Zhang, Keping Bi, Xu Chen, and W Bruce Croft. 2017.
Learning a Hierarchical Embedding Model for Personalized Product Search. In
International Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval.
ACM, 645–654.
[3] Oren Barkan and Noam Koenigstein. 2016. Item2vec: neural item embedding for
collaborative filtering. In International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal
Processing. IEEE, 1–6.
[4] Samaneh Beheshti-Kashi, Hamid Reza Karimi, Klaus-Dieter Thoben, Michael
Lütjen, and Michael Teucke. 2015. A survey on retail sales forecasting and
prediction in fashion markets. Systems Science & Control Engineering 3, 1 (2015),
154–161.
[5] Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. 2013.
Representation
learning: A review and new perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence 35, 8 (2013), 1798–1828.
[6] Yoshua Bengio, Rejean Ducharme, Pascal Vincent, and Christian Janvin. 2003. A
neural probabilistic language model. Journal of Machine Learning Research 3, 6
(2003), 1137–1155.
[7] Phil Blunsom, Edward Grefenstette, Nal Kalchbrenner, et al. 2014. A convolutional
neural network for modelling sentences. In Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[8] Jesus Bobadilla, Fernando Ortega, Antonio Hernando, and Abraham Gutierrez.
2013. Recommender systems survey. Knowledge Based Systems 46 (2013), 109–
132.
[9] Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Angelo Cardoso, Chak H Liu, Roberto Pagliari,
and Marc Peter Deisenroth. 2017. Customer lifetime value prediction using
embeddings. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining. ACM, 1753–1762.
[10] Ronan Collobert and Jason Weston. 2008. A unified architecture for natural lan-
guage processing: Deep neural networks with multitask learning. In International
Conference on Machine learning. ACM, 160–167.
[11] Ronan Collobert, Jason Weston, Leon Bottou, Michael Karlen, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
and Pavel P Kuksa. 2011. Natural Language Processing (Almost) from Scratch.
Journal of Machine Learning Research 12 (2011), 2493–2537.
[12] Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. 2010. Understanding the difficulty of training
deep feedforward neural networks. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. 249–256.
[13] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. 2016. Deep learning. MIT
press.
[14] Alex Graves, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2013. Speech
recognition with deep recurrent neural networks. In International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. IEEE, 6645–6649.
[15] Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. 2016. node2vec: Scalable feature learning for
networks. In International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
ACM, 855–864.
[16] Michael Gutmann and Aapo Hyvarinen. 2012. Noise-contrastive estimation of
unnormalized statistical models, with applications to natural image statistics.
Journal of Machine Learning Research 13, 1 (2012), 307–361.
[17] D Kinga and J Ba Adam. 2015. A method for stochastic optimization. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.
[18] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. 2012. Imagenet classifica-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. 1097–1105.
[19] Quoc Le and Tomas Mikolov. 2014. Distributed representations of sentences and
documents. In International Conference on Machine Learning. 1188–1196.
[20] Yuezhang Li, Ronghuo Zheng, Tian Tian, Zhiting Hu, Rahul Iyer, and Katia P
Sycara. 2016. Joint Embedding of Hierarchical Categories and Entities for Con-
cept Categorization and Dataless Classification. International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (2016), 2678–2688.
[21] Greg Linden, Brent Smith, and Jeremy York. 2003. Amazon. com recommenda-
tions: Item-to-item collaborative filtering. IEEE Internet computing 7, 1 (2003),
76–80.
[22] Julian McAuley, Christopher Targett, Qinfeng Shi, and Anton Van Den Hengel.
2015. Image-based recommendations on styles and substitutes. In Proceedings
of the 38th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval. ACM, 43–52.
[23] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient
estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781
(2013).
[24] Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. 2013.
Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and their Compositionality.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing System. 3111–3319.
[25] Andriy Mnih and Yee Whye Teh. 2012. A fast and simple algorithm for train-
ing neural probabilistic language models. International Conference on Machine
Learning (2012), 1751–1758.
[26] Shumpei Okura, Yukihiro Tagami, Shingo Ono, and Akira Tajima. 2017.
Embedding-based news recommendation for millions of users. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM,
1933–1942.
[27] Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. 2010. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE
Transactions on knowledge and data engineering 22, 10 (2010), 1345–1359.
[28] Bryan Perozzi, Rami Alrfou, and Steven Skiena. 2014. DeepWalk: online learning
of social representations. International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (2014), 701–710.
[29] David MW Powers. 1998. Applications and explanations of Zipf’s law. In Pro-
ceedings of the joint conferences on new methods in language processing and com-
putational natural language learning. Association for Computational Linguistics,
151–160.
[30] Badrul Sarwar, George Karypis, Joseph Konstan, and John Riedl. 2001. Item-based
collaborative filtering recommendation algorithms. In Proceedings of the 10th
international conference on World Wide Web. ACM, 285–295.
[31] Andrew I Schein, Alexandrin Popescul, Lyle H Ungar, and David M Pennock.
2002. Methods and metrics for cold-start recommendations. In Proceedings of the
25th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval. ACM, 253–260.
[32] Zhu Sun, Jie Yang, Jie Zhang, Alessandro Bozzon, Yu Chen, and Chi Xu. 2017.
MRLR: Multi-level Representation Learning for Personalized Ranking in Recom-
mendation. In International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organiza-
tion.
[33] Jian Tang, Meng Qu, Mingzhe Wang, Ming Zhang, Jun Yan, and Qiaozhu Mei. 2015.
LINE: Large-scale Information Network Embedding. In International Conference
on World Wide Web. ACM, 1067–1077.
[34] Ikuya Yamada, Hiroyuki Shindo, Hideaki Takeda, and Yoshiyasu Takefuji. 2016.
Joint Learning of the Embedding of Words and Entities for Named Entity Dis-
ambiguation. Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (2016),
250–259.
[35] Kui Zhao, Xia Hu, Jiajun Bu, and Can Wang. 2017. Deep Style Match for Com-
plementary Recommendation. In AAAI Workshops.
