Multitask Mixture Embeddings for Large Scale
Recommendations
Erik Brinkman
erk@fb.com
Facebook AI Applied Research
Dario Garcia-Garcia
dariogg@fb.com
Facebook AI Applied Research
Henry Ehrenberg
TBD
TBD
Yang Liu
yangliuyl@fb.com
Instagram
Ivan Medvedev
ivanm@fb.com
Instagram
Lin Su
linsucai@fb.com
Facebook AI Applied Research
Chandler Zuo
chandlerzuo@fb.com
Facebook AI Applied Research
ABSTRACT
Embedding-based retrieval is a fundamental piece of many real-
world, massive-scale recommendation systems. Embedding both
users and items in a common space and then applying nearest-
neighbors to collect potentially relevant items for a given user is
intuitive, flexible and efficient. We propose an extension of this
approach in which users are embedded as sets of points, yielding
mixture embedding-based retrieval. We describe this method to-
gether with some other key ingredients used as a retrieval source
in Instagram Explore, one of the largest and most successful uncon-
nected content recommendation surfaces in the world.
ACM Reference Format:
Erik Brinkman, Dario Garcia-Garcia, Henry Ehrenberg, Yang Liu, Ivan
Medvedev, Lin Su, and Chandler Zuo. 2020. Multitask Mixture Embeddings
for Large Scale Recommendations. In ,. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
The abundance of content in today’s digital platforms has made
recommendation systems an important piece to connect creators
and consumers in an efficient manner. This prominent role comes
with significant responsibilities and challenges. The decisions made
by recommendation systems will to a large extent define the user
experience and have ecosystem-level implications because of e.g.
the incentives that they impose on content creators or providers. At
the same time, these systems have to overcome a series of complex
challenges such as how to alleviate the effect of biased data collec-
tion (feedback loops) or how to make sure that recommendations
are simultaneously relevant and diverse. This last aspect, diversity,
is particularly important and complicated, especially when working
with unconnected content recommender systems with a huge (in
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
IRS 2020, Workshop on Industrial Recommendation Systems
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
terms of both size and range) inventory. If the system designers
are not very careful it is likely that the recommendations will end
up focusing on a relatively narrow subset of items, since there are
several forces at play that could encourage this behavior, including
feedback loops and limited model capacity.
Many large-scale recommendation systems use a two-step ar-
chitecture. Starting with a very large pool (potentially billions or
even more) of candidates to be recommended for a given user, the
first step, called retrieval or candidate generation, trims down that
pool into a manageable set, typically in the order of a few thou-
sands. The second step performs the final ranking of the surviving
candidates. The retrieval stage must thus be very computationally
efficient to be able to handle the potentially extremely large can-
didate pool. Typical alternatives include rule-based retrieval and
embedding methods followed by nearest-neighbor (NN) lookups.
Modern approximate NN method [3] are extremely efficient, pro-
viding both sub-linear complexity and fine-tuned implementations,
including GPU-optimized and distributed versions. Together with
the flexibility that embeddings provide (they can be constructed
from features or "explicitly" from a co-occurrence matrix to op-
timize a wide range of losses depending on the specifics of the
application), this makes embedding based retrieval a key tool when
building practical recommendation systems.
The diversity and recall of the final system is heavily determined
by the retrieval phase. Items that are dropped during retrieval will
not be visible to the ranker and thus won’t be presented to the user,
while irrelevant items that pass the retrieval stage can be culled
by the ranker. One of the main motivations of this work is how to
extend embedding-based retrieval methods to improve the diversity
of the candidates while maintaining computational efficiency and
not requiring too drastic changes to the overall system. To that
end we introduce mixture-of-embeddings based retrieval. The idea
here is to represent each user as a set of 𝐾mixture components
in a space R𝐷and then retrieve items for that user by performing
𝐾nearest neighbor lookups, one around each one of the compo-
nents. Intuitively, this partially decouples the different interests of
a user: in a single embedding model, all of the items that can be
retrieved for a user must be close to the user embedding, and thus
by virtue of the triangle inequality also not too far from each other.
In a mixture model, each mixture component can capture items in
IRS 2020, Workshop on Industrial Recommendation Systems
F. LastName et al.
arbitrarily distant parts of the embedding space, dropping the afore-
mentioned constraint on retrieved item similarity. Of course these
effects are not that clear cut in very high dimensional spaces and
one might argue that increasing the dimension of the embedding
space gives a more direct solution to increase the expressiveness of
the models. We’ll also discuss how moving from a single embedding
to a 𝐾-mixture is different to just increasing the dimension of the
embedding space to 𝐾𝐷(spoiler: the non-linearity in the total loss
function that combines the distances from an item to each one of
the embeddings) and why this approach might be preferable in
many scenarios.
Another challenge when building recommendation systems is
defining a proper objective function. Many different aspects con-
tribute to this challenge:
• Many times the user experience can’t be accurately measured
by a single observable magnitude: should we care about
clicks, time spent, other types of engagement signals, ...
• Even if there’s a gold "business metric", that metric might
not be amenable to direct optimization (e.g. daily users)
• Sometimes the best metrics don’t have great coverage (e.g.
explicit surveys)
• Feedback loops make optimization of any single metric po-
tentially dangerous unless a lot of care is put into thinking
through side effects
As a consequence, many times there will not be a single objec-
tive but a set of proxy metrics which are correlated with the final
goal. For this reason we focus also on multi-task models that can
learn simultaneously from all these signals, contributing to alleviate
the feedback loop issues and enabling flexible trade-offs between
coverage and signal quality.
In this paper we bring together all the aforementioned ideas
to develop a multitask, mixture embedding based retrieval system
that can achieve both the scale and performance necessary to help
Instagram Explore, one of the largest and most popular unconnected
content recommendation surfaces in the world.
2
MIXTURE EMBEDDINGS FOR GRAPHS
Let’s consider a bipartite graph 𝐺= (𝑆, 𝐷, 𝐸) where 𝑆is the set
of source nodes, 𝐷is the set of destination nodes and 𝐸is a set
of edges between 𝑆and 𝐷.1 In a general embedding model, each
entity 𝑖∈𝑆∪𝐷is represented through an embedding 𝑈𝑖, while
a scoring function 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒(𝑈𝑠,𝑈𝑑) computes a similarity score for
each pair of entities 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑆, 𝑑∈𝐷with the goal of maximizing
the score for (𝑠,𝑑) ∈𝐸and minimizing it for (𝑠,𝑑) ∉𝐸. In the
mixture embedding model, 𝑈𝑠∈R𝐶𝑠×𝑛, 𝑈𝑑∈R𝐶𝑑×𝑛, where each
row represents a different mixture component with dimension 𝑛,
and 𝐶𝑠, 𝐶𝑑are the number of mixture embeddings on each side.
Each component embedding is then defined with a standard
embedding model. Let 𝑈𝑠𝑐,𝑈𝑑𝑙∈R𝑛denote the 𝑐th and the 𝑙th
embedding component for node 𝑠and 𝑑respectively. In this paper
we use standard cosine similarity
𝑠𝑖𝑚(𝑈𝑠𝑐,𝑈𝑑𝑙) =
𝑈𝑇𝑠𝑐𝑈𝑑𝑙
||𝑈𝑠𝑐||||𝑈𝑑𝑙|| .
1We abuse the naming source and destination even if the graph is not directed
With our component embedding model defined, the mixture
scoring function is simply the composition of two functions
𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒(𝑈𝑠,𝑈𝑑) = 𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙(𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡(𝑈𝑠,𝑈𝑑)).
𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡computes a similarity kernel matrix 𝑀∈R𝐶𝑠×𝐶𝑑where
𝑀𝑐,𝑙= 𝑠𝑖𝑚(𝑈𝑠𝑐,𝑈𝑑𝑙). 𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙pools the similarity matrix into a final
score, and is one of the main design considerations of the overall
loss function as it defines the semantic meaning of mixtures in the
model. The mixture embedding model is simply a restriction on
the class of scoring functions, providing an inductive bias over the
explanations for an interaction between two entities.
2.0.1
Pooling Functions. The most obvious pooling function is
simply the max pool. This function says: two entities need to have
one similar component to be scored highly. While seeming fairly
natural at first, the highly nonlinear cost surface makes this hard
to optimize. A second order approach would be to instead use the
smooth maximum function with temperature 𝛾
smoothmax(𝑀;𝛾) =
Í
𝑐,𝑙𝑀𝑐,𝑙𝑒
𝑀𝑐,𝑙/𝛾
Í
𝑐′,𝑙′ 𝑒
𝑀𝑐′,𝑙′/𝛾.
(1)
When 𝛾→0, Eqn. (1) approaches the maximum cosine similarity
between all pairs of components of the node pair.
2.0.2
Regularized Smoothmax. We further define a regularized
smoothmax
regsmoothmax(𝑀;𝜃,𝛾) =
Õ
𝑐,𝑙
𝑀𝑐,𝑙
 
𝜃+ (1 −𝜃)
𝑒
𝑀𝑐,𝑙/𝛾
Í
𝑐′,𝑙′ 𝑒
𝑀𝑐′,𝑙′/𝛾
!
.
(2)
where 𝜃is the regularization hyperparameter. 𝜃= 0 yields the
standard smooth max function. Larger values of 𝛾and 𝜃push such
the smooth max similarity towards the average cosine similarity
among all pairs of components. Section 3.1 discusses more details
on how these parameters are chosen in training.
2.1
Nonlinear Similarity Function
The idea of using multiple embeddings to represent nodes in a graph
is not new. [1] refers to this as the "personal decomposition" prob-
lem in the context of representing people’s social network, while
[5] refers to this as representing "node polysemy". In addition to the
advantages of mixture embeddings mentioned in these papers, our
motivation behind this framework is mainly to improve diversity.
In a large-scale recommendation system with a huge pool of re-
trieval candidates, it is typical for a user to be interested in different
candidates with very different semantic meaning. In an embedding
space with Euclidean distance, items close to a single user have
to be close to each other as dictated by the triangular inequality.
The distance metric in Eqn. (2) breaks free of such structure. By
introducing nonlinearity in the distance metric, the underlying
embedding space allows multiple items to be close to a single user
while still be distant towards each other.
The nonlinearity in distance construction of Eqn. (2) is essential
in this framework. Using a variety of datasets we have compared
our mixture embedding model against a benchmark model that
embeds each node with a single vector with the dimensionality
Multitask Mixture Embeddings for Large Scale Recommendations
IRS 2020, Workshop on Industrial Recommendation Systems
R𝐶𝑠/𝑑𝑛, using various link retrieval and node label prediction tasks.
We have found our framework to significantly outperform the
benchmark setting, even though the two models have the same
degrees of freedom.
We want to highlight one important difference between our
framework and the standard finite mixture modeling framework.
Standard finite mixture models include mixture weight parameters
that determine the distribution across mixture components. The hi-
erarchical probabilistic formulation in turn determines the distance
metric, the loss function and the training algorithm. Such a "gen-
erative modeling" framework is followed by [5]. Our framework’s
distance metric, Eqn. (2), is independent of such mixture weight
parameters. Training algorithm in Section 3.1 is also only contigent
on the distance metric. The framework itself still accepts the no-
tion of mixture weight parameters, as we will see in Section 3.4,
but those weights are calculated in a separate post processing step
to facilitate nearest neighbor retrieval. From this angle, we argue
that our framework is a "discriminative model" that doesn’t yield
a coherent probabilistic story. Nevertheless, our framework offers
significant computational advantage. Compared to the hierarchical
model in [5], our training algorithm doesn’t require expensive con-
ditional sampling through nested loops, which is a typical artifact
in hierarchical modeling. Such computational efficiency makes this
framework directly applicable to graphs with billions edges. More
details of the algorithm are discussed in the next section.
3
MIXTURE EMBEDDING BASED RETRIEVAL
Because the main motivation of this work is to improve the candi-
date generation step in large-scale recommendation systems, we
designed the model to focus on the retrieval performance from
every aspect.
3.1
Loss Function
The model is trained using a margin ranking loss (MRL) function,
which has been proved superior in many of our retrieval tasks.
Given a positive edge 𝑒= (𝑠,𝑑) ∈𝐸, we construct a set of negative
edges {𝑒′ = (𝑠,𝑑′) : 𝑑′ ∈𝑁(𝑠)}, where 𝑁(𝑠) is the negative sam-
pling function that encompasses the negative sample size and the
pool of potential negative examples. Note that 𝑁(𝑠) is a function of
the source node 𝑠, and we will discuss the reason in Section 3.2. For
each pair of positive and negative edges, the corresponding loss is:
𝑙(𝑒,𝑒′) = max(smoothmax(𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡(𝑈𝑠,𝑈𝑑′);𝛾) + 𝜆
−regsmoothmax(𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡(𝑈𝑠,𝑈𝑑);𝜃,𝛾), 0),
(3)
where 𝜆is the margin hyperparameter. Eqn. (3) applies different
pooling functions for the positive and negative examples in order
for regularization. By the definition of regsmoothmax, scores of
positive examples are pooled more towards the average cosine sim-
ilarity among mixture components compared to scores of negative
examples. In back-propagation, positive examples influence more
on all mixture component pairs, while negative examples influence
mostly on the closest mixture component pair. Our intuition is that
mixture embeddings of the same entity are similar to each other
because they represent different aspect of the same entity. Regular-
ization encourages such similarity structure. Because our training
randomly initializes all embeddings, such regularization helps the
training algorithm to converge to a favorable local optimum. Our
experiments have shown such regularization significantly improves
retrieval.
3.2
Multi-task Model
We have compressed the notations of tasks for simplicity in the
discussions above. In order to leverage collective information from
multiple proxy objectives, we actually focus on multi-task models.
In multi-task training, the edge set 𝐸consists of the union of edges
for individual tasks 𝐸= ∪𝑇∈T 𝐸𝑇, and 𝐸𝑇is composed by source
node type 𝑆𝑇and destination node type 𝐷𝑇, where 𝑆𝑇and 𝐷𝑇can
be the same, and different tasks should share the same set of node
types. In this setting, nodes from all types are embedded in the
same space, which enables us to conduct retrieval between any two
of them.
We train this multi-task model by implementing an additive loss
from all tasks. In addition, our framework allows for the loss of
each training edge to be associated with a weight 𝜔(𝑒,𝑒′). The form
of this weight function is user defined. In multi-task training, we
apply pre-defined weights for all edges belonging to the same task.
Such weight function can be extended. For example, one may use a
function of task weight, source and destination node degree that
can adjust the importance of high-degree or low-degree nodes in
the training. Given this, our model minimizes the following loss
function:
L =
Õ
𝑇∈T
Õ
(𝑠,𝑑) ∈𝐸𝑇
Õ
𝑑′∈𝑁(𝑠)
𝜔(𝑒,𝑒′)𝑙(𝑒,𝑒′).
(4)
In the negative smapling function 𝑁(𝑠), in order to make the neg-
ative sample hard enough for the loss to learn, we ensure that 𝑑′
come from the same node type as 𝑑, so that (𝑠,𝑑′) is a potential
edge within the same task. For destination nodes of different types
from another task, they are potentially embedded into different
subspaces far away from the subspace of 𝑠. Therefore, for 𝑑′ of the
same type as 𝑑and 𝑑′′ of different type, distances between (𝑠,𝑑′′)
are usually further than (𝑠,𝑑′) naturally.
In Eqn. (4), each component in this loss function is computed
based on one positive edge and one negative edge, and the final loss
is simply additive. Therefore, our model is highly scalable utilizing
a distributed training system. We can partition the entire bi-partite
graph from both the source side and the destination side in the
same way as in [4].
3.3
One-sided Negative Sampling
In our training data, the end users of the recommendation system
usually correspond to a node type on one side in the bi-partite
graph, while the content candidates appear on the other side. In
most cases, we only care about directionally retrieving one type of
node from another but not the opposite direction. For example, we
are mostly interested in recommending unconnected contents to
users instead of sourcing potential users to a content. We enforce
such focus on directional retrieval by one-sided negative sampling
during training. We prepare our input graph so that the users in
downstream retrieval tasks always appears as the source node. In
IRS 2020, Workshop on Industrial Recommendation Systems
F. LastName et al.
Eqn. (3), we always sample from the destination side, and con-
nect the sampled destination node 𝑑′ with original source 𝑠of the
positive edge to form a negative edge.
3.4
Mixture Weights
Through computing mixture distance using smooth-max in (2),
mixture embeddings of one node forms a set without certain or-
der. Therefore, training step does not explicitly estimate mixture
component weights. In order to enable sub-linear retrieval, a post
processing step is implemented to compute mixture weights after
training is done. Mixture weights are adaptively calculated based
on a set of tasks T ′ defined on all or a subset of all training tasks
T. Typically, T ′ is the whole set of training tasks, but in certain
applications we also let T ′ include only one training task in order
to compute task specific mixture weights. Denote mixture weights
of source node 𝑠by {𝑤𝑠𝑐, 1 ≤𝑐≤𝐶𝑠}. These weights are computed
by
𝑤𝑠𝑐∝
Õ
{𝑇∈T′}
Õ
(𝑠,𝑑) ∈𝐸𝑇
or (𝑑,𝑠) ∈𝐸𝑇
𝐶𝑑
Õ
𝑙=1
𝑒𝑀𝑐,𝑙/𝛾𝑇,
(5)
and normalized by Í𝐶𝑠
𝑐=1 𝑤𝑠𝑐= 1. Comparing to (2), (5) does not
include the regularization 𝜃hyperparameter, and the smooth-max
temperature𝛾𝑇can be chosen to be different from𝛾used in training.
The mixture weights of destinaton nodes are defined in the same
way.
3.5
Round-robin KNN
Once we have mixture embeddings trained and their corresponding
weights computed, we are empowered to conduct nearest-neighbor
search to obtain a diverse candidate pool per node. For node 𝑠
with 𝐶𝑠mixture embeddings, if we are interested in retrieving
the top 𝐾nearest neighbors from the set of destination nodes 𝐷𝑡
with 𝐶𝑑mixture embeddings, we assign each candidate node 𝑑
a score through an aggregation in the following way. First, for
each component in the source mixture embedding we obtain the
top 𝐾∗𝐶𝑑nearest embeddings from the overall set of destination
mixture embeddings {𝑈𝑐𝑙: 𝑑∈𝐷𝑡,𝑙= 1, . . . ,𝐶𝑑}. We choose the
top 𝐾∗𝐶𝑑nearest neighbors in order to guarantee we have at
least 𝐾nearest neighbors after aggregation and deduplication. We
obtain the corresponding pairwise scores 𝛼𝑠,𝑑(𝑐,𝑙) between the 𝑐th
embedding of 𝑠and the 𝑙th embedding of 𝑑. If the 𝑙th embedding
of 𝑑does not appear in the top 𝐾∗𝐶𝑑nearest embeddings in this
step, then it is scored as 0. Leveraging modern approximate NN
techniques (e.g. [3]), this step can be done very efficiently. Assuming
the larger𝛼is, the closer the two individual embeddings are, then for
each source embedding we aggregate the score of each destination
node by summing the product of destination mixture weight and
NN score, which is 𝛼𝑠,𝑑(𝑐) = Í𝐶𝑑
𝑙=1 𝑤𝑑𝑙𝛼𝑠,𝑑(𝑐,𝑙). We assign the
rank of destination node 𝑑for the 𝑐th embedding of node 𝑠by
ordering 𝛼𝑠,𝑑(𝑐) in descending order, and denote it by 𝑟𝑠,𝑑(𝑐). We
finally aggregate the scores of retrieved destination nodes for each
source embedding up to each source node by computing 𝛼𝑠,𝑑=
max𝐶𝑠
𝑐=1 𝑤𝑠𝑐/𝑟𝑠,𝑑(𝑐). The nodes with highest 𝛼𝑠,𝑑are the nearest
neighbors for 𝑠. We do two rounds of aggregations in this process:
aggregate the scores of destination mixture embeddings first, then
aggregate the scores of source mixture embeddings. In practice we
choose to use summation and maximum respectively as aggregation
functions in each step.
4
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
4.1
Implementation
We implement the techniques described in the previous sections
on top of Pytorch-BigGraph (PBG) [4], a state-of-the-art library
for massive multi-relation embeddings 2. Three specific changes
need to be made to the default options supported by PBG to sup-
port milti-task mixture embedding training. First, we implement a
custom comparator that returns our mixture 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒function instead
of the built in score functions to PBG. Second, we enable support
of heterogeneous embedding dimension for each entity. Mixture
embeddings can be represented as a single large embedding formed
by each component concatenated together, and while it’s possible
to define PBG’s dimension as the largest such dimension, in practice
we found this considerably slower even if there were only a small
portion of entities with “truncated” embeddings. Finally, we enable
single sided negative sampling as described in Section 3.3.3
4.2
Instagram Explore
Instagram’s Explore tab [2] presents users with unconnected con-
tent, i.e. content from creators that the user doesn’t already follow.
Over half of the Instagram community visits Explore every month
to discover new photos, videos, and Stories relevant to their inter-
ests out of billions of high quality pieces of media on that eligible
inventory.
Multitask mixture embedding-based retrieval is actively used in
Instagram Explore as a source of candidates for the ranking stage,
co-existing with several other sources mostly based on account
similarity [2]. We explode each account into two logical entities: a
"consumer" and a "creator" persona. Each consumer persona is mod-
eled as a 5 component mixture, while each creator is represented
by a single component (we are currently experimenting with hav-
ing mixtures on both sides). We consider different types of "edges"
between consumers and creators corresponding to different types
of engagement (e.g. clicks, likes) to construct a bi-partite graph
(i.e. consumer personas are only connected to creator personas).
To perform the actual candidate generation we apply the retrieval
techniques mentioned in Section 3 to each consumer persona to
collect relevant accounts from which to source content that is then
passed on to the ranking stage.
5
CONCLUSIONS
We have presented a type of mixture embedding models that can
extend the expressive power of standard embedding models while
being able to scale to extremely large datasets, together with the in-
gredients necessary to make good use of these mixture embeddings
in the context of candidate generation for large scale recommen-
dation systems based on our experience with Instagram’s Explore
recommender.
2https://github.com/facebookresearch/PyTorch-BigGraph
3The second and third changes have already been upstreamed to PBG.
Multitask Mixture Embeddings for Large Scale Recommendations
IRS 2020, Workshop on Industrial Recommendation Systems
Future research includes ways of making the most efficient possi-
ble use of the expressive capacity provided by the multiple mixture
components per user while adapting to the wide range of data vol-
umes across users typical in recommender systems. For example,
this could include dynamic adjustment of the number of compo-
nents for each user so that e.g. power users or users with very
diverse interests have a larger number of components than more
occasional or "focused" users. Another interesting line is quanti-
fying the uncertainty of the components and the density of the
embedding space to properly allocate the total candidate quota
across the components.
REFERENCES
[1] Alessandro Epasto and Bryan Perozzi. Is a single embedding enough? learning
node representations that capture multiple social contexts. In The World Wide
Web Conference, pages 394–404, 2019.
[2] Facebook.
Powered by AI: Instagram’s Explore recommender system.
https://ai.facebook.com/blog/powered-by-ai-instagrams-explore-recommender-
system, 2019.
[3] Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search
with gpus. IEEE Transactions on Big Data, 2019.
[4] Adam Lerer, Ledell Wu, Jiajun Shen, Timothee Lacroix, Luca Wehrstedt, Abhijit
Bose, and Alex Peysakhovich. Pytorch-biggraph: A large-scale graph embedding
system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.12287, 2019.
[5] Ninghao Liu, Qiaoyu Tan, Yuening Li, Hongxia Yang, Jingren Zhou, and Xia Hu.
Is a single vector enough? exploring node polysemy for network embedding.
In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining, pages 932–940, 2019.
