Neural Feature Embedding for User Response
Prediction in Real-Time Bidding (RTB)
Enno Shioji12 and Masayuki Arai2
1Adform A/S, Wildersgade 10B, DK-1408 Copenhagen, Denmark
2Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Teikyo University, Japan
1Enno.Shioji@adform.com, 2arai@ics.teikyo-u.ac.jp
Abstract. In the area of ad-targeting, predicting user responses is es-
sential for many applications such as Real-Time Bidding (RTB). Many
of the features available in this domain are sparse categorical features.
This presents a challenge especially when the user responses to be pre-
dicted is rare, because each feature will only have very few positive ex-
amples. Recently, neural embedding techniques such as word2vec which
learn distributed representations of words using occurrence statistics in
the corpus have been shown to be eﬀective in many Natural Language
Processing tasks. In this paper, we use real-world data set to show that
a similar technique can be used to learn distributed representations of
features from users web history, and that such representations can be
used to improve the accuracy of commonly used models for predicting
rare user responses.
1
Introduction
Predicting the probability of user response such as click, conversion etc. given an
ad-impression is crucial for many advertisement applications, such as Real-Time
Bidding (RTB). Because of its eﬃciency, linear models such as logistic regression
are the most widely used for this purpose[1]. The models are commonly trained
on sparse categorical features such as user agent, IDs of visited websites etc.,
which are encoded as sparse binary features via one-hot encoding[1]. One of the
prominent problem with these models is the sparsity of data. Especially when
feature interaction is used, the feature representation becomes extremely sparse,
making it diﬃcult to exploit the features eﬃciently. Moreover, traditionally the
industry has focused on predicting clicks, but recently the focus has shifted to
optimizing for other, much rarer user responses like conversions, which exacer-
bates this problem[2, 3]. We refer to this problem as feature sparsity problem.
A similar issue has been recognized in Natural Language Processing (NLP)[4].
Many mainstream models rely on bag-of-words representation, which suﬀers
from the same issue outlined above. Recently, neural embedding techniques
known as word2vec, paragraph2vec etc. that map words and documents into
low-dimensional vector space has been shown to yield state-of-the-art results in
various NLP tasks[5, 6]. In this approach, occurrence statistics in the corpus is
used learn distributed word representations that are much more amenable to
arXiv:1702.00855v1  [cs.IR]  2 Feb 2017
generalization. The technique has been most extensively studied in NLP, but
has also been extended to non-NLP applications[7, 8].
In this paper, we use real-world data set to show that a similar technique can
be applied to user response prediction in RTB. Similar to the situation in Natural
Language Processing, a large amount of user web history can be used to learn
high quality feature representations, which can then be used to predict (rare)
user responses. The technique was shown to improve the accuracy of commonly
used models, especially when labeled data was scarce.
2
Related Works
Various methods have been employed to address the feature sparsity problem.
For example, when higher order category information of features (such as ”prod-
uct category”) is available, it can be added as additional feature to facilitate gen-
eralization. Such higher order categories can be derived from human annotation,
or from the data via unsupervised methods such as topic modelling, clustering
etc.[9, 10]. Other techniques such as counting features can also help by allowing
rare features to contribute jointly[11].
Another category of solutions involve embedding sparse categorical features
into low-dimensional vector space. Various feature transformation methods that
yield dense features has been investigated in conjunction with deep neural net-
works resulting in improvement over major state-of-the-art models[9]. Zhang et
al. also investigated a framework they refer to as implicit look-alike modelling,
in which entities like users, web-pages, ads etc. are mapped into a latent vec-
tor space using both general web browsing behavior and ad response behaviour
data[12].
In this paper, we report initial results of applying a feature transformation
technique similar to neural word embedding to user response prediction in RTB.
The technique shares the beneﬁts of its counterpart in NLP, such as the ability
to encode feature sequences, the ability to incrementally update the embeddings
with new data, and the availability of numerous improvements and extensions
that have been developed since its advent. The result opens up exciting oppor-
tunities to apply techniques that have been successfully used with neural word
embeddings, such as deep neural networks.
3
Neural Feature Embedding for User Response
Prediction
We ﬁrst provide a brief overview of the neural word embedding technique devel-
oped by Mikolov et al[13]. We consider one of its simplest form, the Continuous
Bag-of-Word Model (CBOW) with a single context window. Given a word t in
the corpus and a surrounding word c, we parametrise θ such that the conditional
probabilities p(t|c; θ) is maximized for the corpus. p(t|c; θ) can be modelled using
soft-max as follows:
p(t|c; θ) =
evt·vc
P
c′∈C evt·vc′
(1)
where vt and vc ∈Rn are vector representations for t and c, and C is the set
of all available contexts. n is a hyper-parameter that determines the size of the
embedding, and is chosen empirically. Note that we use a distinct representation
for target and context, following the literature. This objective is straightforward
but expensive to calculate. To alleviate this problem, a technique called negative
sampling[13] is used, wherein random pairs of (t, c) is sampled from the corpus,
assuming they are wrong. This yields the following objective:
arg max
θ
X
(t,c)∈D
log
1
1 + e−vt·vc +
X
(t,c)∈D′
log(
1
1 + evt·vc )
(2)
where D is the set of all target-context pair in the corpus and D′ are randomly
generated (t, c) pairs. The objective is now cheap to calculate.
In this paper, we consider a dataset consisting of ad impressions. When an
ad is shown to a user, some of the browsing history of that user is available as
sequence of content IDs. It is thus relatively straightforward to apply techniques
such as CBOW[13], skip-gram[13] etc. to this data. For this experiment we chose
to discard the sequence of the content IDs and only use the co-occurrence in-
formation. More speciﬁcally, we generated our positive (t, c) pairs by randomly
sampling content IDs from the set of content IDs the user had consumed at the
time of the impression, and our negative pairs randomly from the corpus. It is
known that the probability distribution of such sampling inﬂuences the quality
of the embeddings[5], but we used a uniform distribution for this initial exper-
iment. We then used the resulting content embeddings as features in our user
response model, for which we use logistic regression.
4
Experiment and Discussion
4.1
Dataset
We used a real-world RTB dataset provided by Adform. Each record in the data
corresponds to an ad-impression, and is ordered by the time of impression. The
record consists of a binary label that indicates whether the user subsequently
clicked the ad (click), and a set of content IDs (content_ids) the user had con-
sumed in the past 30 days, up to the time of the impression. The data was taken
from Adform’s impression logs of July 2016. Records for which no content_ids
were available were ﬁltered out. Further, negative examples were down-sampled
at a rate of 0.01 as the data is extremely imbalanced. After the down-sampling,
there were 5.0M examples in total, with 1.1M positive examples. There were
891K distinct content IDs. The data is currently not publicly available.
4.2
Experiment Protocol
The experiment consisted of an unsupervised stage and a supervised stage.
Unsupervised stage. Content embeddings were learned from content_ids
as described above. I.e. the click ﬁeld was discarded and not used for this
stage. Out of the 5.0M data instances, the oldest 4.0M were used for this stage.
We trained the embeddings with varying embedding sizes n (2k∈[1. .7]). Tensor-
ﬂow[14] was used to implement this stage.
Supervised stage. In the supervised stage, binary classiﬁers that predicts
click were trained, using diﬀerent features (see below). For all experiments,
Logistic Regression with L2 normalization was used. Out of the remaining 1.0M
data instances, the newest 30% (300K) were held-out as validation dataset. The
training was done with varying amounts of data (0.3K, 1K, 10K, 100K) that
were randomly sampled from the remaining data (700K). To evaluate the per-
formance of the models, area under the ROC curve (AUC) was used, which is a
commonly used metric for evaluating user response prediction models in RTB[1].
Grid search was performed with varying regularization strength (10k∈[−2. .1]) and
embedding size, and the best result was used as measurement. scikit-learn[15]
was used for the implementation. Below is the list of features we compared:
SB: Sparse Binary. content_ids were encoded as Sparse Binary features
via one-hot encoding. This is our baseline.
DR: Distributed Representation. Each dimension of the resulting embed-
dings were scaled by its maximum absolute value. For each content_id
in content_ids, the corresponding embedding was looked up and the
mean of the embeddings were used as the feature vector. The resulting
feature vector had thus the same length n as the embeddings.
SB+DR: Sparse Binary and Distributed Representation. The feature vector of
SB and DR were concatenated.
4.3
Performance Comparison and Discussion
Table 1 shows the best results obtained for each condition using the aforemen-
tioned grid-search. The results of SB+DR and DR is compared against SB (our
baseline). DR outperforms SB when training data is scarce. SB+DR outperforms
SB in all conditions, especially stronger when training data is scarcer. This is
likely because when training data is scarce, the sparsity issue is more acute and
thus the ability to generalize across features has a larger eﬀect. However, when
large amount of data is available, the lower-dimensional feature representation
of DR likely limits the degree of diﬀerentiation between individual content IDs.
When SB and DR is concatenated, both advantages can be preserved.
Figure 1 shows the diﬀerence in AUC from the SB baseline for DR and
SB+DR, for varying embedding sizes (n). Increasing n improves AUC, but the
return diminishes after about 16 dimensions.
Table 1. AUC performance of click prediction
Training Data
SB+DR
DR
SB
AUC
AUC Lift
AUC
AUC Lift
AUC
0.3K
60.93%
4.33%
61.53%
4.90%
56.60%
1K
65.15%
3.39%
64.20%
2.44%
61.76%
10K
67.42%
2.87%
65.47%
0.92%
64.55%
100K
69.65%
1.34%
65.94%
-2.37%
68.31%
Fig. 1. AUC Performance diﬀerence from baseline against embedding size n
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we reported initial results of applying neural feature embedding
technique to user response prediction in RTB, using a real-word dataset. To
our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time this technique was applied to this
problem. We have demonstrated that the technique can improve performance
of commonly used model in the industry, especially when labeled data is scarce
and when thus the feature sparsity problem is most acute. The fact that large
amount of data can readily be used for training of the feature embeddings, and
that the commonly used logistic regression can be used at prediction time make
the result ideal for industrial implementation.
The result also opens up exciting opportunities to apply improvements and
techniques that have been developed around neural word embeddings, such as
incorporating global context, using multiple representations per word[16], op-
timizing the embeddings for a speciﬁc supervised task using target labels[17],
using a global log-bilinear regression instead of the earlier local context window
methods[18], applying deep neural networks on the embeddings etc.
References
1. Wang, J., Zhang, W., Yuan, S.: Display advertising with real-time bidding (RTB)
and behavioural targeting. CoRR abs/1610.03013 (2016)
2. Dalessandro, B., Hook, R., Perlich, C., Provost, F.: Evaluating and Optimizing
Online Advertising: Forget the Click, But There are Good Proxies. Social Science
Research Network Working Paper Series (October 2012)
3. Vasile, F., Lefortier, D.: Cost-sensitive learning for bidding in online advertising
auctions. CoRR abs/1603.03713 (2016)
4. Bengio, Y., Ducharme, R., Vincent, P., Janvin, C.: A neural probabilistic language
model. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3 (March 2003) 1137–1155
5. Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J.: Distributed represen-
tations of words and phrases and their compositionality. CoRR abs/1310.4546
(2013)
6. Le, Q.V., Mikolov, T.: Distributed representations of sentences and documents.
CoRR abs/1405.4053 (2014)
7. Asgari, E., Mofrad, M.R.: Continuous distributed representation of biological se-
quences for deep proteomics and genomics. PloS one 10(11) (2015) e0141287
8. Barkan, O., Koenigstein, N.: Item2vec: Neural item embedding for collaborative
ﬁltering. CoRR abs/1603.04259 (2016)
9. Zhang, W., Du, T., Wang, J.: Deep learning over multi-ﬁeld categorical data: A
case study on user response prediction. CoRR abs/1601.02376 (2016)
10. Zhang, W., Yuan, S., Wang, J.:
Real-time bidding benchmarking with ipinyou
dataset. CoRR abs/1407.7073 (2014)
11. He, X., Pan, J., Jin, O., Xu, T., Liu, B., Xu, T., Shi, Y., Atallah, A., Herbrich,
R., Bowers, S., Candela, J.Q.n.: Practical lessons from predicting clicks on ads at
facebook. In: Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on Data Mining
for Online Advertising. ADKDD’14, New York, NY, USA, ACM (2014) 5:1–5:9
12. Zhang, W., Chen, L., Wang, J.: Implicit look-alike modelling in display ads: Trans-
fer collaborative ﬁltering to CTR estimation. CoRR abs/1601.02377 (2016)
13. Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J.: Eﬃcient estimation of word repre-
sentations in vector space. CoRR abs/1301.3781 (2013)
14. Abadi, M., Barham, P., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Davis, A., Dean, J., Devin, M., Ghe-
mawat, S., Irving, G., Isard, M., Kudlur, M., Levenberg, J., Monga, R., Moore, S.,
Murray, D.G., Steiner, B., Tucker, P.A., Vasudevan, V., Warden, P., Wicke, M.,
Yu, Y., Zhang, X.: Tensorﬂow: A system for large-scale machine learning. CoRR
abs/1605.08695 (2016)
15. Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O.,
Blondel, M., Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., Vanderplas, J., Passos, A.,
Cournapeau, D., Brucher, M., Perrot, M., Duchesnay, E.: Scikit-learn: Machine
learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12 (2011) 2825–2830
16. Huang, E.H., Socher, R., Manning, C.D., Ng, A.Y.: Improving word representations
via global context and multiple word prototypes.
In: Proceedings of the 50th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Long Papers-
Volume 1, Association for Computational Linguistics (2012) 873–882
17. Labutov, I., Lipson, H.: Re-embedding words. (2013)
18. Pennington, J., Socher, R., Manning, C.D.: Glove: Global vectors for word rep-
resentation. In: Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
(2014) 1532–1543
