Neural Ranking Models with Weak Supervision
Mostafa Dehghani∗
University of Amsterdam
dehghani@uva.nl
Hamed Zamani
University of Massachusets Amherst
zamani@cs.umass.edu
Aliaksei Severyn
Google Research
severyn@google.com
Jaap Kamps
University of Amsterdam
kamps@uva.nl
W. Bruce Crof
University of Massachusets Amherst
crof@cs.umass.edu
ABSTRACT
Despite the impressive improvements achieved by unsupervised
deep neural networks in computer vision and NLP tasks, such im-
provements have not yet been observed in ranking for information
retrieval. Te reason may be the complexity of the ranking problem,
as it is not obvious how to learn from queries and documents when
no supervised signal is available. Hence, in this paper, we propose
to train a neural ranking model using weak supervision, where labels
are obtained automatically without human annotators or any exter-
nal resources (e.g., click data). To this aim, we use the output of an
unsupervised ranking model, such as BM25, as a weak supervision
signal. We further train a set of simple yet eﬀective ranking models
basedonfeed-forwardneuralnetworks. Westudytheireﬀectiveness
under various learning scenarios (point-wise and pair-wise models)
and using diﬀerent input representations (i.e., from encoding query-
document pairs into dense/sparse vectors to using word embedding
representation). We train our networks using tens of millions of
training instances and evaluate it on two standard collections: a ho-
mogeneousnewscollection(Robust)andaheterogeneouslarge-scale
web collection (ClueWeb). Our experiments indicate that employing
properobjectivefunctionsandletingthenetworkstolearntheinput
representation based on weakly supervised data leads to impressive
performance, with over 13% and 35% MAP improvements over the
BM25 model on the Robust and the ClueWeb collections. Our ﬁnd-
ings also suggest that supervised neural ranking models can greatly
beneﬁt from pre-training on large amounts of weakly labeled data
that can be easily obtained from unsupervised IR models.
KEYWORDS Ranking model, weak supervision, deep neural net-
work, deep learning, ad-hoc retrieval
ACM Reference format:
Mostafa Dehghani, Hamed Zamani, Aliaksei Severyn, Jaap Kamps, and W.
Bruce Crof. 2017. Neural Ranking Models with Weak Supervision. In
Proceedings of SIGIR ’17, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, August 07-11, 2017, 10 pages.
DOI: 10.1145/3077136.3080832
1
INTRODUCTION
Learning state-of-the-art deep neural network models requires a
large amounts of labeled data, which is not always readily available
∗Work done while interning at Google Research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’17, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08...$15.00
DOI: 10.1145/3077136.3080832
and can be expensive to obtain. To circumvent the lack of human-
labeled training examples, unsupervised learning methods aim to
model the underlying data distribution, thus learning powerful fea-
ture representations of the input data, which can be helpful for
building more accurate discriminative models especially when litle
or even no supervised data is available.
A large group of unsupervised neural models seeks to exploit the
implicit internal structure of the input data, which in turn requires
customized formulation of the training objective (loss function), tar-
geted network architectures and ofen non-trivial training setups.
For example in NLP, various methods for learning distributed word
representations, e.g., word2vec [27], GloVe [31], and sentence repre-
sentations, e.g., paragraph vectors [23] and skip-thought [22] have
been shown very useful to pre-train word embeddings that are then
used for other tasks such as sentence classiﬁcation, sentiment anal-
ysis, etc. Other generative approaches such as language modeling
in NLP, and, more recently, various ﬂavors of auto-encoders [2] and
generative adversarial networks [13] in computer vision have shown
a promise in building more accurate models.
Despite the advances in computer vision, speech recognition, and
NLP tasks using unsupervised deep neural networks, such advances
have not been observed in core information retrieval (IR) problems,
such as ranking. A plausible explanation is the complexity of the
ranking problem in IR, in the sense that it is not obvious how to
learn a ranking model from queries and documents when no super-
vision in form of the relevance information is available. To overcome
this issue, in this paper, we propose to leverage large amounts of
unsupervised data to infer “noisy” or “weak” labels and use that
signal for learning supervised models as if we had the ground truth
labels. In particular, we use classic unsupervised IR models as a weak
supervision signal for training deep neural ranking models. Weak
supervision here refers to a learning approach that creates its own
training data by heuristically retrieving documents for a large query
set. Tis training data is created automatically, and thus it is possi-
ble to generate billions of training instances with almost no cost.1
As training deep neural networks is an exceptionally data hungry
process, the idea of pre-training on massive amount of weakly su-
pervised data and then ﬁne-tuning the model using a small amount
of supervised data could improve the performance [11].
Te main aim of this paper is to study the impact of weak su-
pervision on neural ranking models, which we break down into the
following concrete research questions:
1Although weak supervision may refer to using noisy data, in this paper, we assume
that no external information, e.g., click-through data, is available.
arXiv:1704.08803v2  [cs.IR]  29 May 2017
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
M. Dehghani et al.
RQ1 Can labels from an unsupervised IR model such as BM25 be
used as weak supervision signal to train an eﬀective neural
ranker?
RQ2 Whatinputrepresentationandlearningobjectiveismostsuit-
able for learning in such a seting?
RQ3 Can a supervised learning model beneﬁt from a weak super-
vision step, especially in cases when labeled data is limited?
Weexaminevariousneuralrankingmodelswithdiﬀerentranking
architectures and objectives, i.e., point-wise and pair-wise, as well
as diﬀerent input representations, from encoding query-document
pairs into dense/sparse vectors to learning query/document embed-
ding representations. Te models are trained on billions of training
examplesthatareannotatedbyBM25, astheweaksupervisionsignal.
Interestingly, we observe that using just training data that are anno-
tated by BM25 as the weak annotator, we can outperform BM25 itself
on the test data. Based on our analysis, the achieved performance is
generally indebted to three main factors: First, deﬁning an objective
function that aims to learn the ranking instead of calibrated scoring
to relax the network from ﬁting to the imperfections in the weakly
supervised training data. Second, leting the neural networks learn
optimal query/document representations instead of feeding them
with a representation based on predeﬁned features. Tis is a key
requirement to maximize the beneﬁts from deep learning models
with weak supervision as it enables them to generalize beter. Tird
and last, the weak supervision seting makes it possible to train the
network on a massive amount of training data.
We further thoroughly analyse the behavior of models to un-
derstand what they learn, what is the relationship among diﬀerent
models, and how much training data is needed to go beyond the
weak supervision signal. We also study if employing deep neural
networks may help in diﬀerent situations. Finally, we examine the
scenario of using the network trained on a weak supervision signal
as a pre-training step. We demonstrate that, in the ranking prob-
lem, the performance of deep neural networks trained on a limited
amount of supervised data signiﬁcantly improves when they are
initialized from a model pre-trained on weakly labeled data.
Our results have broad impact as the proposal to use unsuper-
vised traditional methods as weak supervision signals is applicable
to variety of IR tasks, such as ﬁltering or classiﬁcation, without the
need for supervised data. More generally, our approach uniﬁes the
classic IR models with currently emerging data-driven approaches
in an elegant way.
2
RELATED WORK
Deep neural networks have shown impressive performance in many
computer vision, natural language processing, and speech recogni-
tion tasks [24]. Recently, several atempts have been made to study
deep neural networks in IR applications, which can be generally
partitioned into two categories [29, 46]. Te ﬁrst category includes
approaches that use the results of trained (deep) neural networks
in order to improve the performance in IR applications. Among
these, distributed word representations or embeddings [27, 31] have
atracted a lot of atention. Word embedding vectors have been
applied to term re-weighting in IR models [32, 47], query expan-
sion [10, 33, 43], query classiﬁcation [25, 44], etc. Te main short-
comingofmostoftheapproachesinthiscategoryisthattheobjective
of the trained neural network diﬀers from the objective of these tasks.
For instance, the word embedding vectors proposed in [27, 31] are
trained based on term proximity in a large corpus, which is diﬀerent
from the objective in most IR tasks. To overcome this issue, some ap-
proaches try to learn representations in an end-to-end neural model
for learning a speciﬁc task like entity ranking for expert ﬁnding [39]
or product search [38]. Zamani and Crof [45] recently proposed
relevance-based word embedding models for learning word repre-
sentations based on the objectives that mater for IR applications.
Te second category, which this paper belongs to, consists of
the approaches that design and train a (deep) neural network for
a speciﬁc task, e.g., question answering [6, 41], click models [4],
context-aware ranking [42], etc. A number of the approaches in this
category have been proposed for ranking documents in response to
a given query. Tese approaches can be generally divided into two
groups: late combination models and early combination models (or
representation-focused and interaction-focused models according
to [14]). Te late combination models, following the idea of Siamese
networks [5], independently learn a representation for each query
and candidate document and then calculate the similarity between
the two estimated representations via a similarity function. For ex-
ample, Huang et al. [18] proposed DSSM, which is a feed forward
neuralnetworkwithawordhashingphaseastheﬁrstlayertopredict
the click probability given a query string and a document title. Te
DSSM model was further improved by incorporating convolutional
neural networks [35].
On the other hand, the early combination models are designed
based on the interactions between the query and the candidate doc-
ument as the input of network. For instance, DeepMatch [26] maps
each text to a sequence of terms and trains a feed-forward network
for computing the matching score. Te deep relevance matching
model for ad-hoc retrieval [14] is another example of an early combi-
nation model that feeds a neural network with the histogram-based
features representing interactions between the query and document.
Earlycombiningenablesthemodeltohaveanopportunitytocapture
various interactions between query and document(s), while with late
combination approach, the model has only the chance of isolated
observation of input elements. Recently, Mitra et al. [28] proposed to
simultaneously learn local and distributional representations, which
are early and late combination models respectively, to capture both
exact term matching and semantic term matching.
Until now, all the proposed neural models for ranking are trained
on either explicit relevance judgements or clickthrough logs. How-
ever, a massive amount of such training data is not always available.
In this paper, we propose to train neural ranking models using
weaksupervision, whichisthemostnaturalwaytoreusetheexisting
supervised learning models where the imperfect labels are treated
as the ground truth. Te basic assumption is that we can cheaply
obtain labels (that are of lower quality than human-provided labels)
by expressing the prior knowledge we have about the task at hand by
specifying a set of heuristics, adapting existing ground truth data for
a diﬀerent but related task (this is ofen referred to distant supervi-
sion2), extracting supervision signal from external knowledge-bases
orontologies, crowd-sourcingpartialannotationsthatarecheaperto
get, etc. Weak supervision is a natural way to beneﬁt from unsuper-
vised data and it has been applied in NLP for various tasks including
relation extraction [3, 15], knowledge-base completion [17], sen-
timent analysis [34], etc. Tere are also similar atempts in IR for
2We do not distinguish between weak and distant supervision as the diﬀerence is subtle
and both terms are ofen used interchangeably in the literature.
Neural Ranking Models with Weak Supervision
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
automatically constructing test collections [1] and learning to rank
using labeled features, i.e. features that an expert believes they are
correlated with relevance [9]. In this paper, we make use of tradi-
tional IR models as the weak supervision signal to generate a large
amount of training data and train eﬀective neural ranking models
that outperform the baseline methods by a signiﬁcant margin.
3
WEAK SUPERVISION FOR RANKING
Deep learning techniques have taken oﬀin many ﬁelds, as they
automate the onerous task of input representation and feature en-
gineering. On the other hand, the more the neural networks become
deep and complex, the more it is crucial for them to be trained on
massive amounts of training data. In many applications, rich anno-
tations are costly to obtain and task-speciﬁc training data is now a
critical botleneck. Hence, unsupervised learning is considered as
a long standing goal for several applications. However, in a number
of information retrieval tasks, such as ranking, it is not obvious how
to train a model with large numbers of queries and documents with
no relevance signal. To address this problem in an unsupervised
fashion, we use the idea of “Pseudo-Labeling” by taking advantage
of existing unsupervised methods for creating a weakly annotated
set of training data and we propose to train a neural retrieval model
with weak supervision signals we have generated. In general, weak
supervision refers to learning from training data in which the labels
are imprecise. In this paper, we refer to weak supervision as a learn-
ing approach that automatically creates its own training data using
an existing unsupervised approach, which diﬀers from imprecise
data coming from external observations (e.g., click-through data) or
noisy human-labeled data.
We focus on query-dependent ranking as a core IR task. To
this aim, we take a well-performing existing unsupervised retrieval
model, such as BM25. Tis model plays the role of “pseudo-labeler”
in our learning scenario. In more detail, given a target collection
and a large set of training queries (without relevance judgments),
we make use of the pseudo-labeler to rank/score the documents for
each query in the training query set. Note that we can generate as
much as training data as we need with almost no cost. Te goal is
to train a ranking model given the scores/ranking generated by the
pseudo-labeler as a weak supervision signal.
In the following section, we formally present a set of neural
network-based ranking models that can leverage the given weak
supervision signal in order to learn accurate representations and
ranking for the ad-hoc retrieval task.
4
NEURAL RANKING MODELS
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce our ranking models. Ten, we
describe the architecture of the base neural network model shared
by diﬀerent ranking models. Finally, we discuss the three input layer
architectures used in our neural rankers to encode (query, candidate
document) pairs.
4.1
Ranking Architectures
We deﬁne three diﬀerent ranking models: one point-wise and two
pair-wise models. We introduce the architecture of these models
and explain how we train them using weak supervision signals.
Score model : Tis architecture models a point-wise ranking model
thatlearnstopredictretrievalscoresforquery-documentpairs. More
formally, the goal in this architecture is to learn a scoring function
(a) Score model
(b) Rank model
(c) RankProb model
Figure 1: Diﬀerent Ranking Architectures
S(q,d;θ) that determines the retrieval score of documentd for query
q, given a set of model parameters θ. In the training stage, we are
given a training set comprising of training instances each a tripleτ =
(q,d,sq,d), whereq is a query from training query setQ,d represents
a retrieved document for the query q, and sq,d is the relevance score
(calculated by a weak supervisor), which is acquired using a retrieval
scoring function in our setup. We consider the mean squared error
as the loss function for a given batch of training instances:
L(b;θ)= 1
|b|
|b |
Õ
i=1
(S({q,d}i;θ)−s{q,d }i )2
(1)
where {q,d}i denotes the query and the corresponding retrieved
document in the ith training instance, i.e. τi in the batch b. Te
conceptual architecture of the model is illustrated in Figure 1a.
Rank model : In this model, similar to the previous one, the goal
is to learn a scoring function S(q,d;θ) for a given pair of queryq and
documentd with the set of model parametersθ. However, unlike the
previous model, we do not aim to learn a calibrated scoring function.
Inthismodel,asitisdepictedinFigure1b,weuseapair-wisescenario
duringtraininginwhichwehavetwopoint-wisenetworksthatshare
parameters and we update their parameters to minimize a pair-wise
loss. In this model, each training instance has ﬁve elements: τ =
(q,d1,d2,sq,d1,sq,d2). Duringtheinference,wetreatthetrainedmodel
as a point-wise scoring function to score query-document pairs.
We have tried diﬀerent pair-wise loss functions and empirically
found that the model learned based on the hinge loss (max-margin
loss function) performs beter than the others. Hinge loss is a linear
loss that penalizes examples that violate the margin constraint. It is
widely used in various learning to rank algorithms, such as Ranking
SVM [16]. Te hinge loss function for a batch of training instances
is deﬁned as follows:
L(b;θ)= 1
|b|
|b |
Õ
i=1
max

0,ε−sign(s{q,d1 }i −s{q,d2 }i )
(S({q,d1}i;θ)−S({q,d2}i;θ))
	
,
(2)
where ε is the parameter determining the margin of hinge loss. We
found that as we compress the outputs to the range of [−1,1], ε =1
works well as the margin for the hinge loss function.
RankProb model : Te third architecture is based on a pair-wise
scenario during both training and inference (Figure 1c). Tis model
learns a ranking function R(q,d1,d2;θ) which predicts the proba-
bility of document d1 to be ranked higher than d2 given q. Sim-
ilar to the rank model, each training instance has ﬁve elements:
τ =(q,d1,d2,sq,d1,sq,d1). For a given batch of training instances, we
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
M. Dehghani et al.
deﬁne our loss function based on cross-entropy as follows:
L(b;θ)=−1
|b|
|b |
Õ
i=1
P{q,d1,d2 }i log(R({q,d1,d2}i;θ))
(3)
+(1−P{q,d1,d2 }i )log(1−R({q,d1,d2}i;θ))
where P{q,d1,d2 }i is the probability of document d1 being ranked
higherthand2,basedonthescoresobtainedfromtraininginstanceτi:
P{q,d1,d2 }i =
s{q,d1 }i
s{q,d1 }i +s{q,d2 }i
(4)
It is notable that at inference time, we need a scalar score for
each document. Terefore, we need to turn the model’s pair-wise
predictions into a score per document. To do so, for each document,
we calculate the average of predictions against all other candidate
documents, which has O(n2) time complexity and is not practical in
real-world applications. Tere are some approximations could be
applicable to decrease the time complexity at inference time [40].
4.2
Neural Network Architecture
As shown in Figure 1, all the described ranking architectures share a
neural network module. We opted for a simple feed-forward neural
network which is composed of: input layer z0, l −1 hidden layers,
and the output layer zl. Te input layer z0 provides a mapping
ψ to encode the input query and document(s) into a ﬁxed-length
vector. Te exact speciﬁcation of the input representation feature
functionψ is given in the next subsection. Each hidden layer zi is a
fully-connected layer that computes the following transformation:
zi =α(Wi.zi−1+bi); 1<i <l−1,
(5)
whereWi andbi respectively denote the weight matrix and the bias
term corresponding to theith hidden layer, and α(.) is the activation
function. We use the rectiﬁer linear unit ReLU(x)=max(0,x) as the
activation function, which is a common choice in the deep learning
literature [24]. Te output layer zl is a fully-connected layer with
a single continuous output. Te activation function for the output
layer depends on the ranking architecture that we use. For the score
model architecture, we empirically found that a linear activation
function works best, while tanh and the sigmoid functions are used
for the rank model and rankprob model respectively.
Furthermore,topreventfeatureco-adaptation,weusedropout [36]
as the regularization technique in all the models. Dropout sets a
portion of hidden units to zero during the forward phase when
computing the activations which prevents overﬁting.
4.3
Input Representations
We explore three deﬁnitions of the input layer representation z0
captured by a feature function ψ that maps the input into a ﬁxed-
size vector which is further fed into the fully connected layers: (i)
a conventional dense feature vector representation that contains
various statistics describing the input query-document pair, (ii) a
sparse vector containing bag-of-words representation, and (iii) bag-
of-embeddings averaged with learned weights. Tese input rep-
resentations deﬁne how much capacity is given to the network to
extract discriminative signal from the training data and thus result in
diﬀerent generalization behavior of the networks. It is noteworthy
that input representation of the networks in the score model and
rank model is deﬁned for a pair of the query and the document, while
the network in the rankprob model needs to be fed by a triple of the
query, the ﬁrst document, and the second document.
Dense vector representation (Dense) : In this seting, we build
a dense feature vector composed of features used by traditional IR
methods, e.g., BM25. Te goal here is to let the network ﬁt the func-
tion described by the BM25 formula when it receives exactly the
same inputs. In more detail, our input vector is a concatenation
(||) of the following inputs: total number of documents in the col-
lection (i.e., N), average length of documents in the collection (i.e.,
avд(ld)D), document length (i.e., ld), frequency of each query term
ti in the document (i.e., t f (ti,d)), and document frequency of each
query term (i.e., d f (ti)). Terefore, for the point-wise seting, we
have the following input vector:
ψ(q,d)=[N ||avд(ld)D ||ld ||{d f (ti)||t f (ti,d)}1≤i ≤k],
(6)
where k is set to a ﬁxed value (5 in our experiments). We truncate
longer queries and do zero padding for shorter queries. For the net-
works in the rankprob model, we consider a similar function with
additional elements: the length of the second document and the
frequency of query terms in the second document.
Sparse vector representation (Sparse) : Next, we move away
from a fully featurized representation that contains only aggregated
statistics and let the network performs feature extraction for us. In
particular, we build a bag-of-words representation by extracting
term frequency vectors of query (t f vq), document (t f vd), and the
collection (t f vc) and feed the network with concatenation of these
three vectors. For the point-wise seting, we have the following
input vector:
ψ(q,d)=[t f vc ||t f vq||t f vd]
(7)
For the network in rankprob model, we have a similar input vector
with both t f vd1 and t f vd2. Hence, the size of the input layer is
3 ×vocab size in the point-wise seting, and 4 ×vocab size in the
pair-wise seting.
Embedding vector representation (Embed) : Te major weak-
ness of the previous input representation is that words are treated
as discrete units, hence prohibiting the network from performing
sof matching between semantically similar words in queries and
documents. In this input representation paradigm, we rely on word
embeddings to obtain more powerful representation of queries and
documents that could bridge the lexical chasm. Te representation
functionψ consists of three components: an embedding function
E : V →Rm (where V denotes the vocabulary set and m is the
embedding dimension), a weighting function W : V →R, and a
compositionality function ⊙: (Rm,R)n →Rm. More formally, the
functionψ for the point-wise seting is deﬁned as:
ψ(q,d)=[⊙|q |
i=1(E(tq
i ),W(tq
i ))||⊙|d |
i=1(E(td
i ),W(td
i ))],
(8)
where tq
i and td
i denote the ith term in query q and document d,
respectively. For the network of the rankprob model, another similar
term is concatenated with the above vector for the second document.
Te embedding function E transforms each term to a dense m-di-
mensional ﬂoat vector as its representation, which is learned during
the training phase. Te weighting function W assigns a weight to
each term in the vocabulary set, which is supposed to learn term
global importance for the retrieval task. Te compositionality func-
tion ⊙projects a set of n embedding and weighting pairs to an m-
Neural Ranking Models with Weak Supervision
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
dimensional representation, independent from the value of n. Te
compositionality function is given by:
⊙n
i=1(E(ti),W(ti))=
n
Õ
i=1
c
W(ti)·E(ti),
(9)
which is the weighted element-wise sum of the terms’ embedding
vectors. c
W is the normalized weight that is learned for each term,
given as follows:
c
W(ti)=
exp(W(ti))
Ín
j=1exp(W(tj))
(10)
All combinations of diﬀerent ranking architectures and diﬀerent
input representations presented in this section can be considered
for developing ranking models.
5
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
In this section, we describe the train and evaluation data, metrics we
report, and detailed experimental setup. Ten we discuss the results.
5.1
Data
Collections.Inourexperiments, weusedtwostandardTRECcollec-
tions: Teﬁrstcollection(calledRobust04)consistsofover500knews
articles from diﬀerent news agencies, that is available in TREC Disks
4 and 5 (excluding Congressional Records). Tis collection, which
was used in TREC Robust Track 2004, is considered as a homoge-
neous collection, because of the nature and the quality of documents.
Te second collection (called ClueWeb) that we used is ClueWeb09
Category B, a large-scale web collection with over 50 million English
documents, which is considered as a heterogeneous collection. Tis
collection has been used in TREC Web Track, for several years. In our
experimentswiththiscollection, weﬁlteredoutthespamdocuments
using the Waterloo spam scorer3 [7] with the default threshold 70%.
Te statistics of these collections are reported in Table 1.
Training query set. To train our neural ranking models, we used
the unique queries (only the query string) appearing in the AOL
query logs [30]. Tis query set contains web queries initiated by
real users in the AOL search engine that were sampled from a three-
month period from March 1, 2006 to May 31, 2006. We ﬁltered out
a large volume of navigational queries containing URL substrings
(“htp”, “www.”, “.com”, “.net”, “.org”, “.edu”). We also removed all
non-alphanumeric characters from the queries. We made sure that
no queries from the training set appear in our evaluation sets. For
each dataset, we took queries that have at least ten hits in the tar-
get corpus using the pseudo-labeler method. Applying all these
processes, we ended up with 6.15 million queries for the Robust04
dataset and 6.87 million queries for the ClueWeb dataset. In our
experiments, we randomly selected 80% of the training queries as
training set and the remaining 20% of the queries were chosen as
validation set for hyper-parameter tuning. As the “pseudo-labeler”
in our training data, we have used BM25 to score/rank documents
in the collections given the queries in the training query set.
Evaluation query sets. We use the following query sets for eval-
uation that contain human-labeled judgements: a set of 250 queries
(TREC topics 301–450 and 601–700) for the Robust04 collection that
werepreviouslyusedinTRECRobustTrack2004. Asetof200queries
3htp://plg.uwaterloo.ca/∼gvcormac/clueweb09spam/
Table 1: Collections statistics.
Collection
Genre
Qeries
# docs
length
Robust04
news
301-450,601-700
528k
254
ClueWeb
webpages
1-200
50m
1,506
(topics 1-200) were used for the experiments on the ClueWeb collec-
tion. Tese queries were used in TREC Web Track 2009–2012. We
only used the title of topics as queries.
5.2
Evaluation Metrics.
To evaluate retrieval eﬀectiveness, we report three standard evalua-
tion metrics: mean average precision (MAP) of the top-ranked 1000
documents, precision of the top 20 retrieved documents (P@20), and
normalized discounted cumulative gain (nDCG) [19] calculated for
the top 20 retrieved documents (nDCG@20). Statistically signiﬁcant
diﬀerences of MAP, P@20, and nDCG@20 values are determined us-
ing the two-tailed paired t-test with p value <0.05, with Bonferroni
correction.
5.3
Experimental Setup
All models described in Section 4 are implemented using Tensor-
Flow [12, 37]. In all experiments, the parameters of the network are
optimized employing the Adam optimizer [21] and using the com-
putedgradientofthelosstoperformtheback-propagationalgorithm.
All model hyper-parameters were tuned on the respective validation
set (see Section 5.1 for more detail) using batched GP bandits with an
expected improvement acquisition function [8]. For each model, the
size of hidden layers and the number of hidden layers were selected
from [16,32,64,128,256,512,1024] and [1,2,3,4], respectively. Te
initial learning rate and the dropout parameter were selected from
[1E−3,5E−4,1E−4,5E−5,1E−5] and [0.0,0.1,0.2,0.5], respectively.
For models with embedding vector representation, we considered
embedding sizes of [100,300,500,1000]. As the training data, we
take the top 1000 retrieved documents for each query from training
query set Q, to prepare the training data. In total, we have |Q|×1000
(∼6E10 examples in our data) point-wise example and ∼|Q|×10002
(∼6E13 examples in our data) pair-wise examples. Te batch size in
our experiments was selected from [128,256,512]. At inference time,
foreachquery, wetakethetop2000retrieveddocumentsusingBM25
as candidate documents and re-rank them by the trained models. In
our experiments, we use the Indri4 implementation of BM25 with
the default parameters (i.e., k1 =1.2,b =0.75, and k3 =1000).
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In the following, we evaluate our neural rankers trained with diﬀer-
ent learning approaches (Section 4) and diﬀerent input representa-
tions (Section 4.3). We atempt to break down our research questions
to several subquestions, and provide empirical answers along with
the intuition and analysis behind each question:
How do the neural models with diﬀerent training objectives
and input representations compare? Table 2 presents the perfor-
mance of all model combinations. Interestingly, combinations of the
rank modelandtherankprob modelwithembeddingvectorrepresen-
tation outperform BM25 by signiﬁcant margins in both collections.
For instance, the rankprob model with embedding vector represen-
tation that shows the best performance among the other methods,
4htps://www.lemurproject.org/indri.php
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
M. Dehghani et al.
Table 2: Performance of the diﬀerent models on diﬀerent datasets. Ĳor Źindicates that the improvements or degradations with
respect to BM25 are statistically signiﬁcant, at the 0.05 level using the paired two-tailed t-test.
Method
Robust04
ClueWeb
MAP
P@20
nDCG@20
MAP
P@20
nDCG@20
BM25
0.2503
0.3569
0.4102
0.1021
0.2418
0.2070
Score + Dense
0.1961Ź
0.2787Ź
0.3260Ź
0.0689Ź
0.1518Ź
0.1430Ź
Score + Sparse
0.2141Ź
0.3180Ź
0.3604Ź
0.0701Ź
0.1889Ź
0.1495Ź
Score + Embed
0.2423Ź
0.3501
0.3999
0.1002
0.2513
0.2130
Rank + Dense
0.1940Ź
0.2830Ź
0.3317Ź
0.0622Ź
0.1516Ź
0.1383Ź
Rank + Sparse
0.2213Ź
0.3216Ź
0.3628Ź
0.0776Ź
0.1989Ź
0.1816Ź
Rank + Embed
0.2811Ĳ
0.3773Ĳ
0.4302Ĳ
0.1306Ĳ
0.2839Ĳ
0.2216Ĳ
RankProb + Dense
0.2192Ź
0.2966Ź
0.3278Ź
0.0702Ź
0.1711Ź
0.1506Ź
RankProb + Sparse
0.2246Ź
0.3250Ź
0.3763Ź
0.0894Ź
0.2109Ź
0.1916
RankProb + Embed
0.2837Ĳ
0.3802Ĳ
0.4389Ĳ
0.1387Ĳ
0.2967Ĳ
0.2330Ĳ
surprisingly, improves BM25 by over 13% and 35% in Robust04 and
ClueWeb collections respectively, in terms of MAP. Similar improve-
ments can be observed for the other evaluation metrics.
Regarding the modeling architecture, in the rank model and the
rankprob model, compared to the score model, we deﬁne objective
functionsthattargettolearnrankinginsteadofscoring. Tisispartic-
ularly important in weak supervision, as the scores are imperfect val-
ues—using the ranking objective alleviates this issue by forcing the
model to learn a preference function rather than reproduce absolute
scores. Inotherwords,usingtherankingobjectiveinsteadoflearning
to predict calibrated scores allows the rank model and the rankprob
model to learn to distinguish between examples whose scores are
close. Tisway,somesmallamountofnoise,whichisacommonprob-
lem in weak supervision, would not perturb the ranking as easily.
Regarding the input representations, embedding vector represen-
tation leads to beter performance compared to the other ones in all
models. Using embedding vector representation not only provides
thenetworkwithmoreinformation,butalsoletsthenetworktolearn
proper representation capturing the needed elements for the next
layers with beter understanding of the interactions between query
and documents. Providing the network with already engineered
features would block it from going beyond the weak supervision
signal and limit the ability of the models to learn latent features that
are unatainable through feature engineering.
Note that although the rankprob model is more precise in terms of
MAP, the rank model is much faster in the inference time (O(n) com-
paredtoO(n2)), whichisadesirablepropertyinreal-lifeapplications.
Why do dense vector representation and sparse vector repre-
sentationfailtoreplicatetheperformanceofBM25?Although
neural networks are capable of approximating arbitrarily complex
non-linear functions, we observe that the models with dense vector
representation fail to replicate the BM25 performance, while they
are given the same feature inputs as the BM25 components (e.g.,
TF, IDF, average document length, etc). To ensure that the train-
ing converges and there is no overﬁting, we have looked into the
training and validation loss values of diﬀerent models during the
training time. Figure 2 illustrates the loss curves for the training and
validation sets (see Section 5.1) per training step for diﬀerent models.
As shown, in models with dense vector representation, the training
lossesdropquicklytovaluesclosetozerowhilethisisnotthecasefor
thevalidationlosses, whichisanindicatorofover-ﬁtingonthetrain-
ing data. Although we have tried diﬀerent regularization techniques,
like l2-regularization and dropout with various parameters, there
is less chance for generalization when the networks are fed with the
fully featurized input. Note that over-ﬁting would lead to poor per-
formance, especially in weak supervision scenarios as the network
learns to model imperfections from weak annotations. Tis phenom-
enonisalsothecaseformodelswiththesparsevectorrepresentation,
but with less impact. However, in the models with the embedding
vector representation, the networks do not overﬁt, which helps it
to go beyond the weak supervision signals in the training data.
How are the models related? To beter understand the relation-
ship of diﬀerent neural models described above, we compare their
performance across the query dimension following the approach
in [28]. We assume that similar models should perform similarly for
the same queries. Hence, we represent each model by a vector, called
the performance vector, whose elements correspond to per query
performance of the model, in terms of nDCG@20. Te closer the
performance vectors are, the more similar the models are in terms
of query by query performance. For the sake of visualization, we re-
duce the vectors dimension by projecting them to a two-dimensional
space, using t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE)5.
Figure 3 illustrates the proximity of diﬀerent models in the Ro-
bust04 collection. Based on this plot, models with similar input repre-
sentations (same color) have quite close performance vectors, which
means that they perform similarly for same queries. Tis is not neces-
sarilythecaseformodelswithsimilararchitecture(sameshape). Tis
suggests that the amount and the way that we provide information
to the networks are the key factors in the ranking performance.
Wealsoobservethatthescore modelwithdensevectorrepresenta-
tionistheclosesttoBM25whichisexpected. Itisalsointerestingthat
models with embedding vector representation are placed far away
from other models which shows they perform diﬀerently compared
to the other input representations.
Howmeaningfularethecompositionalityweightslearnedin
the embedding vector representation? In this experiment, we
5htps://lvdmaaten.github.io/tsne/
Neural Ranking Models with Weak Supervision
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
(a) Score-Dense
(b) Score-Sparse
(c) Score-Embed
(d) Rank-Dense
(e) Rank-Sparse
(f) Rank-Embed
(g) RankProb-Dense
(h) RankProb-Sparse
(i) RankProb-Embed
Figure 2: Training and validation loss curves for all combinations of diﬀerent ranking architectures and feeding paradigms.
BM25
Score + Dense
Score + Sparse
Score + Embed
Rank + Dense
Rank + Sparse
Rank + Embed
RankProb + Dense
RankProb + Sparse
RankProb + Embed
Figure 3: Proximity of diﬀerent models in terms of query-
by-query performance.
focus on the best performing combination, i.e., the rankprob model
with embedding vector representation. To analyze what the network
learns, we look into the weights W (see Section 4.3) learned by the
network. Note that the weighting function W learns a global weight
for each vocabulary term. We notice that in both collections there
is a strong linear correlation between the learned weights and the
inverse document frequency of terms. Figure 4 illustrates the scater
plots of the learned weight for each vocabulary term and its IDF,
in both collections. Tis is an interesting observation as we do not
provide any global corpus information to the network in training
(a) Robust04
(Pearson Correlation: 0.8243)
(b) ClueWeb
(Pearson Correlation: 0.7014)
Figure 4: Strong linear correlation between weight learned
by the compositionality function in the embedding vector
representation and inverse document frequency.
and the network is able to infer such a global information by only
observing individual training instances.
Howwelldootheralternativesfortheembeddingandweight-
ing functions in the embedding vector representation per-
form?
Considering embedding vector representation as the input represen-
tation, we have examined diﬀerent alternatives for the embedding
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
M. Dehghani et al.
Table 3: Performance of the rankprob model with variants of the embedding vector representation on diﬀerent datasets.
Ĳindicates that the improvements over all other models are statistically signiﬁcant, at the 0.05 level using the paired two-tailed
t-test, with Bonferroni correction.
Embedding type
Robust04
ClueWeb
MAP
P@20
nDCG@20
MAP
P@20
nDCG@20
Pretrained (external) + Uniform weighting
0.1656
0.2543
0.3017
0.0612
0.1300
0.1401
Pretrained (external) + IDF weighting
0.1711
0.2755
0.3104
0.0712
0.1346
0.1469
Pretrained (external) + Weight learning
0.1880
0.2890
0.3413
0.0756
0.1344
0.1583
Pretrained (target) + Uniform weighting
0.1217
0.2009
0.2791
0.0679
0.1331
0.1587
Pretrained (target) + IDF weighting
0.1402
0.2230
0.2876
0.0779
0.1674
0.1540
Pretrained (target) + Weight learning
0.1477
0.2266
0.2804
0.0816
0.1729
0.1608
Learned + Uniform weighting
0.2612
0.3602
0.4180
0.0912
0.2216
0.1841
Learned + IDF weighting
0.2676
0.3619
0.4200
0.1032
0.2419
0.1922
Learned + Weight learning
0.2837Ĳ
0.3802Ĳ
0.4389Ĳ
0.1387Ĳ
0.2967Ĳ
0.2330Ĳ
function E: (1) employing pre-trained word embeddings learned
from an external corpus (we used Google News), (2) employing pre-
trained word embeddings learned from the target corpus (using the
skip-gram model [27]), and (3) learning embeddings during the net-
work training as it is explained in Section 4.3. Furthermore, for the
compositionality function ⊙, we tried diﬀerent alternatives: (1) uni-
form weighting (simple averaging which is a common approach in
compositionality function), (2) using IDF as ﬁxed weights instead of
learning the weighting function W, and (3) learning weights during
the training as described in Section 4.3.
Table 3 presents the performance of all these combinations on
both collections. We note that learning both embedding and weight-
ing functions leads to the highest performance in both collections.
Tese improvements are statistically signiﬁcant. According to the
results, regardless of the weighting approach, learning embeddings
during training outperforms the models with ﬁxed pre-trained em-
beddings. Tis supports the hypothesis that with the embedding
vector representation the neural networks learn an embedding that
is based on the interactions of query and documents that tends to be
tuned beter to the corresponding ranking task. Also, regardless of
the embedding method, learning weights helps models to get beter
performance compared to the ﬁxed weightings, with either IDF or
uniform weights. Although weight learning can signiﬁcantly aﬀect
the performance, it has less impact than learning embeddings.
Note that in the models with pre-trained word embeddings, em-
ploying word embeddings trained on the target collection outper-
forms those trained on the external corpus in the ClueWeb collection;
whilethisisnotthecasefortheRobust04collection. Tereasoncould
be related to the collection size, since the ClueWeb is approximately
100 times larger than the Robust04.
In addition to the aforementioned experiments, we have also
tried initializing the embedding matrix with a pre-trained word
embedding trained on the Google News corpus, instead of random
initialization. Figure 5 presents the learning curve of the models.
According to this ﬁgure, the model initialized by a pre-trained em-
bedding performs beter than random initialization when a limited
amount of training data is available. When enough training data
is fed to the network, initializing with pre-trained embedding and
random values converge to the same performance. An interesting
observation here is that in both collections, these two initializations
converge when the models exceed the performance of the weak
(a) Robust04
(b) ClueWeb
Figure 5: Performance of the rankprob model with learned
embedding, pre-trained embedding, and learned embedding
with pre-trained embedding as initialization, with respect to
diﬀerent amount of training data.
supervision source, which is BM25 in our experiments. Tis sug-
gests that the convergence occurs when accurate representations
are learned by the networks, regardless of the initialization.
Are deep neural networks a good choice for learning to rank
with weak supervision? To see if there is a real beneﬁt from us-
ing a non-linear neural network in diﬀerent setings, we examined
RankSVM [20] as a strong-performing pair-wise learning to rank
method with linear kernel that is fed with diﬀerent inputs: dense
vector representation, sparse vector representation, and embedding
vector representation. Considering that oﬀ-the-shelf RankSVM is
not able to learn embedding representations during training, for
embedding vector representation, instead of learning embeddings
we use a pre-trained embedding matrix trained on Google News and
ﬁxed IDF weights.
TeresultsarereportedinTable4. AsBM25isnotalinearfunction,
RankSVM with linear kernel is not able to completely approximate
it. However, surprisingly, for both dense vector representation and
sparse vector representation, RankSVM works as well as neural net-
works(seeTable2). Also, comparedtothecorrespondingexperiment
in Table 3, the performance of the neural network with an external
pre-trained embedding and IDF weighting is not considerably beter
than RankSVM. Tis shows that having non-linearity in neural net-
works does not help that much when we do not have representation
learning as part of the model. Note that all of these results are still
lower than BM25, which shows that they are not good at learning
from weak supervision signals for ranking.
Neural Ranking Models with Weak Supervision
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
Table 4: Performance of the linear RankSVM with diﬀerent features.
Method
Robust04
ClueWeb
MAP
P@20
nDCG@20
MAP
P@20
nDCG@20
RankSVM + Dense
0.1983
0.2841
0.3375
0.0761
0.1840
0.1637
RankSVM + Sparse
0.2307
0.3260
0.3794
0.0862
0.2170
0.1939
RankSVM + (Pretrained (external) + IDF weighting)
0.1539
0.2121
0.1852
0.0633
0.1572
0.1494
Score (one layer with no nonlinearity) + Embed
0.2103
0.3986
0.3160
0.0645
0.1421
0.1322
Table 5: Performance of the rankprob model with embedding vector representation in fully supervised setting, weak supervised
setting, and weak supervised plus supervision as ﬁne tuning.
Ĳindicates that the improvements over all other models are
statistically signiﬁcant, at the 0.05 level using the paired two-tailed t-test, with Bonferroni correction.
Method
Robust04
ClueWeb
MAP
P@20
nDCG@20
MAP
P@20
nDCG@20
Weakly supervised
0.2837
0.3802
0.4389
0.1387
0.2967
0.2330
Fully supervised
0.1790
0.2863
0.3402
0.0680
0.1425
0.1652
Weakly supervised + Fully supervised
0.2912Ĳ
0.4126Ĳ
0.4509Ĳ
0.1520Ĳ
0.3077Ĳ
0.2461Ĳ
We have also examined the score model with a network with a
single linear hidden layer, with the embedding vector representation,
which is equivalent to a linear regression model with the ability of
representation learning. Comparing the results of this experiment
with Score-Embed in Table 2, we can see that with a single-linear
network we are not able to achieve a performance that is as good as
a deep neural network with non-linearity. Tis shows that the most
important superiority of deep neural networks over other machine
learning methods is their ability to learn an eﬀective representation
and take all the interactions between query and document(s) into
consideration for approximating an eﬀective ranking/scoring func-
tion. Tis can be achieved when we have a deep enough network
with non-linear activations.
How useful is learning with weak supervision for supervised
ranking? In this set of experiments, we investigate whether em-
ploying weak supervision as a pre-training step helps to improve the
performance of supervised ranking, when a small amount of training
data is available. Table 5 shows the performance of the rankprob
model with the embedding vector representation in three situations:
(1) when it is only trained on weakly supervised data (similar to the
previous experiments), (2) when it is only trained on supervised data,
i.e., relevance judgments, and (3) when the parameters of the net-
work is pre-trained using the weakly supervised data and then ﬁne
tuned using relevance judgments. In all the supervised scenarios, we
performed 5-fold cross-validation over the queries of each collection
and in each step, we used the TREC relevance judgements of the
training set as supervised signal. For each query with m relevant
documents, we also randomly sampledm non-relevant documents
as negative instances. Binary labels are used in the experiments: 1
for relevant documents and 0 for non-relevant ones.
Te results in Table 5 suggest that pre-training the network with
a weak supervision signal, signiﬁcantly improves the performance
of supervised ranking. Te reason for the poor performance of the
supervised model compared to the conventional learning to rank
models is that the number of parameters are much larger, hence it
needs much more data for training.
Insituationswhenlitlesuperviseddataisavailable,itisespecially
helpful to use unsupervised pre-training which acts as a network
pre-conditioning that puts the parameter values in the appropri-
ate range that renders the optimization process more eﬀective for
further supervised training [11].
With this experiment, we indicate that the idea of learning from
weak supervision signals for neural ranking models, which is pre-
sented in this paper, not only enables us to learn neural ranking
models when no supervised signal is available, but also has substan-
tial positive eﬀects on the supervised ranking models with limited
amount of training data.
7
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we proposed to use traditional IR models such as BM25
as a weak supervision signal in order to generate large amounts of
training data to train eﬀective neural ranking models. We examine
various neural ranking models with diﬀerent ranking archit