Personalized Entity Recommendation: A Heterogeneous
Information Network Approach
Xiao Yu†, Xiang Ren†, Yizhou Sun‡, Quanquan Gu†,
Bradley Sturt†, Urvashi Khandelwal†, Brandon Norick†, Jiawei Han†
†University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
†{xiaoyu1, xren7, qgu3, sturt1, khndlwl2, bnorick, hanj}@illinois.edu
‡Northeastern Univeristy, Boston, MA, USA
‡yzsun@ccs.neu.edu
ABSTRACT
Among diﬀerent hybrid recommendation techniques, network-
based entity recommendation methods, which utilize user or
item relationship information, are beginning to attract in-
creasing attention recently. Most of the previous studies in
this category only consider a single relationship type, such
as friendships in a social network. In many scenarios, the
entity recommendation problem exists in a heterogeneous
information network environment. Diﬀerent types of rela-
tionships can be potentially used to improve the recommen-
dation quality. In this paper, we study the entity recom-
mendation problem in heterogeneous information networks.
Speciﬁcally, we propose to combine heterogeneous relation-
ship information for each user diﬀerently and aim to pro-
vide high-quality personalized recommendation results using
user implicit feedback data and personalized recommenda-
tion models.
In order to take full advantage of the relationship hetero-
geneity in information networks, we ﬁrst introduce meta-
path-based latent features to represent the connectivity be-
tween users and items along diﬀerent types of paths. We
then deﬁne recommendation models at both global and per-
sonalized levels and use Bayesian ranking optimization tech-
niques to estimate the proposed models. Empirical studies
show that our approaches outperform several widely em-
ployed or the state-of-the-art entity recommendation tech-
niques.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information
Filtering
Keywords
Hybrid Recommender System; Information Network
1.
INTRODUCTION
Entity recommendation, as one of the most eﬀective and
widely used information ﬁltering and discovery methods, has
been actively studied in the past decade in both industry and
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
WSDM’14, February 24–28, 2014, New York, New York, USA.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2351-2/14/02 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556195.2556259.
academia. Among diﬀerent recommendation techniques, hy-
brid recommender systems, which combine user feedback
data (explicit ratings or implicit user log) and additional
information of users or items, can achieve better recommen-
dation results in certain scenarios, based on recent studies
[6] [20].
In many recommendation applications, additional infor-
mation regarding users and items can be obtained, e.g., user
demographic attributes, product speciﬁcations, or user so-
cial network information. Moreover, the entity recommen-
dation problem often exists in a heterogeneous information
network environment with diﬀerent types of attributes and
relationships of users, items, and other entities available. An
illustration of a movie recommendation problem in a hetero-
geneous information network can be found in Figure 1. In
this example, besides users and movies and the user-movie
interaction relationships, other types of entities can be found
and linked to the movie recommendation problem, such as
actors, directors, and genres.
Diﬀerent types of relation-
ships between users (e.g., friendship) and entities (e.g., di-
rector directed a movie) can be potentially utilized in hybrid
recommender systems.
users
movies
Schindler's 
List
Good Will 
Hunting
The 
Terminal
Saving 
Private Ryan
Steven 
Spielberg 
(director)
Matt 
Damon 
(actor)
Tom 
Hanks 
(actor)
Liam 
Neeson
(actor)
War (tag)
other entities
S h
S h
Te
Te
Te
Go
H
Priv
Priv
S
Priv
drama 
(genre)
implicit
feedback
relationships
Figure 1:
A heterogeneous information network
snippet with users, movies, actors, directors and
tags as entities and the corresponding relationships
between these entities
Previous studies suggest that by utilizing additional user
or item relationship information, the quality of the recom-
mender systems can be improved.
Our study falls in the
category of such hybrid recommender systems. The diﬀer-
ence between our work and other link-based hybrid methods
is that most previous studies only utilize a single type of rela-
tionship, e.g., trust relationship [10], friend relationship [19],
or user membership [31]. We propose to study entity rec-
ommendation problem in the aforementioned heterogeneous
network environment, aiming to take advantage of diﬀerent
types of relationship information at the same time.
Previous studies [29] [30] on link-based hybrid recommender
systems apply the same recommendation models to all the
users when recommending items. They rely on the personal
ratings or user feedback data to achieve recommendation
personalization. However, such approaches cannot fully dis-
tinguish user interests and preferences, and thus may lead
to unsatisfying results. For example, Alice and Bob watched
the movie “Paciﬁc Rim”. Alice watched this movie because
she likes robot / monster stories (genre and story of the
movie) while Bob watched this movie because his friends
watched the same movie. If we apply the same recommen-
dation model (e.g., social network-based collaborative ﬁlter-
ing) to both users without understanding or diﬀerentiating
their motives and interests, the recommendation results may
not satisfy the information discovery needs of diﬀerent users.
In this paper, we introduce a novel entity recommenda-
tion framework in heterogeneous information networks using
implicit feedback data. We combine user feedback with dif-
ferent types of entity relationships in a collaborative ﬁltering
way. We personalize recommendation results by both con-
sidering personal user implicit feedback data and building
personalized recommendation models for diﬀerent users.
To take advantage of the relationship heterogeneity of the
information network, we ﬁrst diﬀuse the observed user im-
plicit feedback along diﬀerent meta-paths to generate pos-
sible recommendation candidates, under the corresponding
user interest semantic assumptions. We apply matrix factor-
ization techniques on the diﬀused user preferences to calcu-
late latent representations for users and items accordingly.
We then combine these latent features and deﬁne a global
recommendation model. To further distinguish user inter-
ests, we propose to build recommendation models at per-
sonalized level, i.e., we build diﬀerent entity recommenda-
tion models for diﬀerent users. We adopt a Bayesian rank-
ing optimization technique for model estimation. Empirical
studies in two real world datasets, IMDb-MovieLens-100K
and Yelp, have shown that the proposed recommendation
models outperform several state-of-the-art implicit feedback
recommendation systems.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
1. We study personalized entity recommendation with
implicit user feedback in heterogeneous information
networks.
2. To take advantage of the relationship heterogeneity,
we propose to diﬀuse user preferences along diﬀerent
meta-paths in information networks to generate latent
features for users and items.
3. The proposed framework generates personalized rec-
ommendation models for diﬀerent users eﬀectively and
eﬃciently.
4. Empirical studies in two real-world datasets, IMDb-
MovieLens-100K and Yelp, demonstrate the power of
our methodology.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
preliminaries for this study are introduced in Section 2. The
meta-path-based latent features and the global recommen-
dation model are presented in Section 3. We propose the
personalized recommendation framework in Section 4 and
parameter estimation techniques in 5.
Experiments and
analysis are in Section 6. Finally, we discuss related work in
Section 7 and conclude the study in Section 8.
actor
director
tag
genre
country
keyword
studio
movie
(a) IMDb Network Schema
customer
review
location
avg. 
rating
check-in
dist.
business
category
check-in
(b) Yelp Network Schema
Figure 2: Information network schemas (solid rect-
angles represent entity types and dashed rectangles
represent attribute types)
Table 1: Notations
Notation
Description
u, e
user, item (or entity)
R
implicit feedback matrix
G, GT
heterogeneous information network and schema
A, R
entity type and relationship type
P, p
meta-path and path
˜R(q)
diﬀused user preferences along the q-th meta-path
U, V
low rank representations of users and items
C
user clusters
θ, θ{·}
global and hidden local model parameters
2.
BACKGROUND AND PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we present the background and prelimi-
naries of this study. Detailed problem deﬁnition is included
at the end of this section.
2.1
Binary User Feedback
With m users U = {u1, ..., um} and n items I = {e1, ..., en},
we deﬁne the user implicit feedback matrix R ∈Rm×n as
follows:
Rij =

1,
if (ui, ej) interaction is observed;
0,
otherwise.
Notice that the value 1 in R represents interactions be-
tween users and items, e.g., users watched a movie or users
browsed a restaurant website. The value 1 in the implicit
feedback data does not mean that users like the items. A
user buys a movie ticket because she or he is interested in the
movie but this user might dislike the movie after watching
it. Similarly the value 0 in R does not mean that the users
dislike the items, but are a mixture of negative feedback
(the users are not interested in the items) and unobserved
interactions (the users are not aware of these items for now).
Several previous studies have additional assumptions about
the implicit feedback data, e.g., user-item interaction fre-
quency, or the dwelling time of each interaction.
Not to
digress from the purpose of this study, we use binary user
feedback in its original form as deﬁned above.
However,
additional information as mentioned can be added into the
factorization process of the proposed models accordingly.
2.2
Heterogeneous Information Network
Similar to [24], we deﬁne information networks as follows:
Definition 1
(Information Network). An informa-
tion network is deﬁned as a directed graph G = (V, E) with
an entity type mapping function φ : V →A and a link type
mapping function ψ : E →R. Each entity v ∈V belongs to
an entity type φ(v) ∈A, and each link l ∈E belongs to a
relation type ψ(l) ∈R.
We call an information network a heterogeneous informa-
tion network when |A| > 1 or |R| > 1. To be consistent with
recommender system terminology, we refer to the entities in
the information network which are being recommended as
items.
Similar to an entity-relation diagram in a relational database,
we use an abstract graph (i.e., network schema) to represent
the entity and relation type restrictions in heterogeneous in-
formation networks, denoted by GT = (A, R).
Examples
of heterogeneous information networks and partial network
schemas can be found in Figure 2.
2.3
Matrix Factorization for Implicit Feedback
Matrix factorization techniques have been used to inter-
pret implicit user feedback in previous studies [5] [9], by
learning the low-rank matrix representations for users and
items. More speciﬁcally, factorization methods seek to ap-
proximate the implicit feedback matrix R with the product
of the low-rank matrices as follows:
R ≈UV T
(1)
where U ∈Rm×d are the latent features representing users
and V ∈Rn×d are the latent features representing items,
with d < min(n, m).
The recommendation score between ui and ej can be com-
puted with the estimated low-rank matrices as r(ui, ej) =
UiV T
j , where Ui denotes the i-th row of the matrix U and Vj
denotes the j-th row of V . By sorting items with their rec-
ommendation scores, we can return the top-k items which
ui has not interacted with before as the recommendation
results.
To solve Equation (1), the non-negative factorization tech-
niques (NMF) discussed in [5] can be directly employed.
More advanced methods [9] [6] [19] have been studied re-
cently to incorporate additional information in order to fur-
ther improve the performance.
In our proposed recommendation models, when deﬁning
user item features, we rely on matrix factorization methods
to derive low-rank representations of users and items under
diﬀerent semantics. One should notice that our proposed
models are orthogonal to factorization techniques, i.e., one
can extend the proposed models easily with advanced fac-
torization techniques.
In this study, aiming to propose a
generic recommendation framework, we use the basic NMF
method in [5] when deﬁning features and models. By uti-
lizing advanced factorization methods, the performance of
the our methods can be improved accordingly due to the
aforementioned orthogonality.
2.4
Problem Deﬁnition
We deﬁne the recommendation problem which we study
in this paper as follows:
Definition 2
(Problem Definition). Given a hetero-
geneous information network G with user implicit feedback
R, for a user ui, we aim to build personalized recommenda-
tion model for ui, and recommend a ranked list of items that
are of interest to ui accordingly.
Notations which are used in the rest of the paper can be
found in Table 1.
3.
META-PATH-BASED LATENT FEATURES
In this section, aiming to utilize the rich yet under-discovered
information network, we present a user preference diﬀusion-
based feature generation approach, which combines user im-
plicit feedback and heterogeneous entity relationships. We
u1 
u2 
a2 
a3 
a1 
e1 
e4 
e5 
e2 
genre: drama 
u3 
director 
a3
tag: AcademyAward 
Figure 3: User preference discussion along diﬀerent
meta-paths (Example 1)
then deﬁne a recommendation function with the latent fea-
tures at a global level at the end of this section. Notice that
we use the term “global” to represent the process of applying
the same recommendation model to all users. We still utilize
personal user implicit feedback data during recommendation
with the global recommendation model. We introduce per-
sonalized recommendation models in Section 4. We discuss
the learning algorithms for the recommendation models in
Section 5.
3.1
Meta-Path
From the information network point of view, the entity
recommendation problem is to seek certain connectivity be-
tween users and items. In heterogeneous information net-
works, two entities can be connected via diﬀerent paths (see
Figure 3 for examples).
Due to the multiplicity of entity
and relationship types in the information networks, these
paths may contain diﬀerent entity types, relationship types
in diﬀerent orders and they can have various lengths.
In
order to describe path types in heterogeneous information
network, we introduce the deﬁnition of meta-path proposed
in [24]. Meta-paths are deﬁned in the scope of information
network schemas, and describe how two entity types could
be connected via diﬀerent types of paths.
Definition 3
(Meta-Path). A meta path P = A0
R1
−−→
A1
R2
−−→...
Rk
−−→Ak is a path in a network schema GT =
(A, R), which deﬁnes a new composite relation R1R2...Rk
between type A0 and Ak, where Ai ∈A and Ri ∈R for
i = 0, . . . , k, A0 = dom(R1) = dom(P), Ak = range(Rk) =
range(P) and Ai = range(Ri) = dom(Ri+1) for i = 1, . . . , k−
1.
where dom(·) deﬁnes the domain of certain relationship and
range(·) deﬁnes the range.
We use p to denote the paths in information networks and
P to denote meta-paths. Based on the above deﬁnition, one
can notice that meta-paths are the types for paths in infor-
mation networks. Previous studies suggest that meta-paths
can be used to facilitate entity similarity or proximity mea-
surement and similarity semantic disambiguation [24] [28].
We use the following example to demonstrate the intuition
of utilizing meta-paths in entity recommendation problem.
Example 1
(Different Meta-Paths in IMDb). With
the graph schema of IMDb deﬁned in Figure 2(a), we can
derive a number of meta-paths which connect users with
movies. We show two possible meta-paths as follows:
u2 
u1 
e1 
e2 
e3 
a1 
a4 
a2 
a5 
a3 
0.5 
0.4 
0.9 
Figure 4: User preference diﬀusion score calculation
(Example 2). The solid red links represent observed
user implicit feedback while the purple doted links
represent diﬀused user preferences.
• P1: user
V iewed
−−−−−→movie
V iewed−1
−−−−−−−→user
F ollows
−−−−−→actor
StarredIn
−−−−−−−→movie
• P2: user
V iewed
−−−−−→movie
StarredIn−1
−−−−−−−−→actor
StarredIn
−−−−−−−→
movie
StarredIn−1
−−−−−−−−→actor
StarredIn
−−−−−−−→movie
We give two path examples of the two meta-paths in Fig-
ure 3 (the solid blue line represents meta-path P1 and the
solid red line represents meta-path P2).
These two meta-
paths connect users and movies under diﬀerent semantic
assumptions.
P1 explores the social relationships of other
users who watched movies in common with the target user,
while P2 utilizes movie-actor links to build relationships be-
tween users and movies. By measuring proximity between
users and movies along diﬀerent meta-paths, we may be able
to make movie recommendations to users from diﬀerent se-
mantic perspectives in information networks.
When representing longer meta-paths, relationship types
can be ignored when doing so does not cause ambiguity.
The recursive parts of the meta-paths can be compressed
with exponentiation notation. For example, we use user −(
movie −actor −movie)2 to represent meta-path P2 in
the above example.
3.2
User Preference Diffusion
With the implicit user feedback data deﬁned in Section 2
and meta-path deﬁned above, we introduce the the user pref-
erence diﬀusion process along meta-paths. As mentioned be-
fore, implicit feedback represents user item interactions. the
value 1 in implicit feedback indicates that users are more
interested in the corresponding items than the rest of the
items.
We use the term user preference to represent the
user interests in implicit feedback data. Intuitively, if we
can understand the semantic meanings of user preferences
and ﬁnd similar items to the ones that the users were inter-
ested in, following the discovered semantics, we can make
entity recommendations to these users accordingly.
Based on this observation and the problem deﬁnition pre-
sented in Section 2, in this paper, we focus on meta-paths
in the format of user −item −∗−item when building
recommendation models. The intuition is we want to dif-
fuse the observed users preferences in implicit feedback data
along diﬀerent meta-paths so that users can be connected
with other items.
By deﬁning a user preference diﬀusion
score between the target user and all possible items along
diﬀerent meta-paths, we can now measure the possibility of
an unobserved user-item interaction in the information net-
work under diﬀerent semantic assumptions.
Given a meta-path P = R1R2...Rk with dom(P) = user
and range(P) = item, let P′ = R2...Rk with dom(P′) =
item and range(P′) = range(P) = item. We deﬁne the
user preference diﬀusion score between user i and item j
along P by extending PathSim measurement proposed in
[24] as follows:
s(ui, ej|P)
(2)
=
X
e∈I
2 × Rui,e × |{pe❀ej : pe❀ej ∈P′}|
|{pe❀e : pe❀e ∈P′}| + |{pej❀ej : pej❀ej ∈P′}|
where pe❀ej is a path between e and ej, pe❀e is a path
between e and e, and pej❀ej is a path between ej and ej.
The user preference diﬀusion score between user ui and
item ej contains two parts: (1) the observed user-item inter-
actions associated with ui, and (2) the connectivity between
the items that ui is interested in and potential items of in-
terest, which are represented by ej in Equation (2). Notice
the connectivity between items is deﬁned as the number of
paths between these items following meta-path P and nor-
malized by the visibility of the items so the diﬀusion score
does not overly favor popular items. We demonstrate the
user preference diﬀusion process with a toy example as in
Figure 4.
Example 2
(User Preference Diffusion Score).
In this toy example, we use a small information network
which contains two users (u1 and u2), three movies (e1, e2
and e3), and 5 actors (a1, ..., a5). These entities are inter-
connected as shown in Figure 4 (The solid red links represent
observed user implicit feedback while the purple doted links
represent the diﬀused user preferences).
We use user −
movie −actor −movie as meta-path P when calculating
the diﬀusion score. Based on implicit feedback data R, we
know that u1 watched movie e2. Based on the information
network structure, there is 1 path between e1 and e2 follow-
ing the aforementioned meta-path, 2 paths between e1 and
e1 and 2 paths between e2 and e2. By plugging the implicit
feedback data and the numbers of paths described above into
Equation (2), we can get that the user preference diﬀusion
score under meta-path P from u1 to e1 is 0.5. Other diﬀu-
sion scores in this example can be calculated accordingly.
By measuring the diﬀusion scores between all users and
all items along meta-path P, we can generate a diﬀused user
preference matrix ˜R ∈Rm×n.
˜Ri represents the possible
preferences of user ui if he or she explores the network for
new content following meta-path P (ui watches movies with
certain genres or ui watches movies from certain directors).
By repeating this process, with L diﬀerent meta-paths, we
can calculate L diﬀerent diﬀused user preference matrices
accordingly.
We denote these user preference matrices as
˜R(1), ˜R(2), ..., ˜R(L).
This process propagates user preferences along diﬀerent
meta-paths in the heterogeneous information networks, and
it mimics users’ information discovery process. The diﬀusion
score indicates the possibility of certain user-item interaction
under certain meta-path semantic. The diﬀusion scores can
be used to deﬁne recommendation models.
3.3
Global Recommendation Model
We denote ˜R(q) as the diﬀused user preference matrix
along the q-th meta-path. Following the intuition and princi-
ple of matrix factorization-based recommendation methods,
we can derive low-rank user and item matrices from each
diﬀused preference matrix accordingly. These low-rank ma-
trices are the latent representations of users and items, un-
der the semantic meaning of the corresponding meta-path.
With low-rank matrix factorization technique, we can fac-
torize the diﬀused matrix ˜R(q) as follows:
( ˆU (q), ˆV (q))
=
argminU,V ∥˜R(q) −UV T ∥2
F
(3)
s.t.
U ≥0,
V ≥0,
where ˆU (q) ∈Rm×d represents users and ˆV (q) ∈Rn×d rep-
resents items, with d < min(n, m). ˆU (q)
i
is the latent feature
for user ui along the q-th meta-path and ˆV (q)
j
is the latent
feature for ej along the q-th meta-path respectively.
As discussed in Section 2, we apply the generic NMF
method to solve Equation (3), although more advanced fac-
torization techniques can be used instead. By repeating the
above process for all L diﬀused user preference matrices, we
can now generate L pairs of representations of users and
items ( ˆU (1), ˆV (1)), ..., ( ˆU (L), ˆV (L)). Each low-rank feature
pair represents users and items under a speciﬁc relationship
semantic due to the user preference diﬀusion process. When
deﬁning recommendation models with these latent-features,
diﬀerent feature pairs may have diﬀerent importance. For
example, users are more likely to follow certain actors when
choosing movies rather than consider which movie studios
these movies are made. With this observation, following [30],
we deﬁne a global recommendation model as follows:
r(ui, ej) =
L
X
q=1
θq · ˆU (q)
i
ˆV (q)T
j
(4)
where θq is the weight for the q-th user and item low-rank
representation pair. Based on the non-negative property of
the features, we add θq ≥0 as an optimization constraint.
With the recommendation model in Equation (4), given a
user, we can now assign recommendation scores to all items,
and then rank these items accordingly. We return the top-K
results as the recommendation results. We will discuss how
to estimate the parameters in the recommendation model in
Section 5.
4.
PERSONALIZED RECOMMENDATION
MODEL
We proposed to diﬀuse user preferences along diﬀerent
meta-paths in heterogeneous information networks, and cal-
culate latent features for users and items under various se-
mantic assumptions with matrix factorization techniques.
We then deﬁned the global recommendation model with
these latent features, which essentially combines the ob-
served implicit feedback from users and diﬀerent types of
relationships in the information network together. During
recommendation, we apply the global model to all users and
utilize users’ personal feedback to generate recommendation
results. However, such a solution does not distinguish user
interests or behavior patterns at the model level. For ex-
ample, the learned global model may suggest that majority
users watch popular movies featuring famous actors, but this
rule might not be true for all individuals.
In this section, we extend the proposed global recommen-
dation model to a ﬁner level of granularity.
Rather than
learn one recommendation model for all the users, we aim
to calculate diﬀerent recommendation models for diﬀerent
users to better capture user preferences and interests. The
straightforward way of learning personalized models is to es-
timate the recommendation model deﬁned in Equation (4)
with each user’s own implicit feedback data. However, the
number of feedback per user follows power law distribution
(we demonstrate this claim in Section 6), which means we do
not have enough feedback data to learn personalized models
for most of the users.
Although users may have diﬀerent behaviors from each
other, a subgroup of users can share similar interests and
preferences from certain perspectives. For example, comic
fans are interested in super-hero, fantasy and adventure movies
while fans of Steven Spielberg follow movies directed by him.
Motivated by this observation, we propose to ﬁrst cluster
users based on their interests, and then learn a recommen-
dation models within each cluster. Notice that one user can
belong to diﬀerent user clusters (one can be comic fan and
Spielberg fan at the same time). When recommending, we
ﬁrst calculate the personalized recommendation model for
the target user by combining the recommendation models
of the related user clusters, and then calculate the recom-
mendation results with the personalized model of the target
user. We deﬁne the personalized recommendation function
for user ui as follows:
r∗(ui, ej) =
c
X
k=1
sim(Ck, ui)
L
X
q=1
θ{k}
q
· ˆU (q)
i
ˆV (q)T
j
(5)
where C represents user clusters related to target user ui
and function sim(·, ·) deﬁnes the cosine similarity between
the center of cluster Ck and ui. θ{k}
q
represents the recom-
mendation model deﬁned in cluster Ck. We deﬁne θ{·} =
θ{1}, ..., θ{c} as the recommendation model parameters for
this approach.
Compared with L parameters in the global recommen-
dation model (Equation (4)), the personalized recommen-
dation approach has a total c × L parameters, where c is
the number of clusters. With a relatively larger parameter
space, now we can generate personalized recommendation
models eﬃciently and represent diﬀerent user interests or
behavior patterns eﬀectively. We discuss the user clustering
and the model learning algorithm in details in Section 5.
After estimating recommendation models for all the user
clusters θ{·}, when recommending items for ui, we ﬁrst ﬁnd
the clusters that ui is related to (has a high similarity to the
cluster center), and then combine the related user cluster-
ing parameters following Equation (5). With the calculated
personalized recommendation model, we can assign recom-
mendation score to each item for ui. Recommendation can
be made by sorting all items with their recommendation
scores and returning the top-k items.
The number of clusters could be essential to this method.
If the cluster number c is too small, we may not be able
to distinguish user interests well. If the cluster number is
too big, the number of users in each cluster becomes very
small. In this case, we may not have enough training data
to learn the recommendation models. A good estimation of
the optimal number of clusters can be achieved by cross-
validation using training data. We discuss the performance
change with diﬀerent parameter c in Section 6.5.
5.
MODEL LEARNING WITH IMPLICIT
FEEDBACK
In this section, we introduce learning algorithms for both
global and personalized recommendation models. We ﬁrst
discuss parameter estimation method for global recommen-
dation model (Equation (4)) and then extend the learning
algorithm to personalized recommendation models.
Recommendation models proposed in this paper take ad-
vantage of the heterogeneous entity relationships in infor-
mation networks.
More speciﬁcally, we combine network
diﬀusion-based latent features with parameters indicating
the importance of the corresponding meta-path in the rec-
ommendation process. To learn the importance of the latent
features, we use user implicit feedback as training data. As
discussed in Section 2, the value 1 in implicit feedback data
represents positive feedback (users are interested in such
items) while the value 0 represents a mixture of negative
feedback (users are not interested in such items) and un-
observed potential interactions (users are not aware of such
items). Traditional learning methods adopt classiﬁcation or
learning-to-rank objective functions and usually treat 1s in
training dataset as positives and 0s as negatives.
As we
discussed, such methods do not ﬁt in the deﬁnition of im-
plicit feedback data and they cannot generate high quality
recommendation models.
Motivated by [21], we employ a diﬀerent learning approach
by considering the correct item pair orders. We deﬁne an
objective function to order 1 values before 0 values for each
user. The assumption behind this objective function is that
users are more interested in the items with value 1 in R than
the rest of the items, which is a weaker and more plausible
assumption compared with the traditional approaches.
5.1
Bayesian Ranking-Based Optimization
We use p(ea > eb; ui|θ) to denote the probability that user
ui prefers ea over eb. The Bayesian formulation of the op-
timization criterion is to maximize the posterior probability
as follows:
p(θ|R) ∝p(R|θ)p(θ),
(6)
where θ = {θ1, ..., θL} represents the global model parame-
ters, and p(R|θ) represent the probability that all item pairs
can be ranked correctly for all users according to R, i.e., for
each user, items with feedback 1 can be ranked before items
with feedback 0.
With the assumption that both user preferences and or-
dering of the item pairs are independent, we can expand the
likelihood function p(R|θ) as follows:
p(R|θ)
=
Y
ui∈U
p(Ri|θ)
(7)
=
Y
ui∈U
Y
(ea>eb)∈Ri
p(ea > eb; ui|θ)
where (ea > eb) ∈Ri represent all item pairs with the cor-
rect orders in the observed implicit feedback of ui.
We deﬁne p(ea > eb; ui|θ) as:
p(ea > eb; ui|θ) = σ(r(ui, ea) −r(ui, eb)),
(8)
where σ is the logistic sigmoid function σ(x) =
1
1+e−x .
We assume that p(θ) is a Gaussian distribution with zero
mean and variance-covariance matrix Σθ = λI. With the
probability and the likelihood deﬁned above, we can derive
the objective function as follows:
O
=
−ln p(θ|R) = −ln p(R|θ)p(θ)
(9)
=
−
X
ui∈U
X
(ea>eb)∈Ri
ln p(ea > eb; ui|θ) + λ∥θ∥2
2
=
−
X
ui∈U
X
(ea>eb)∈Ri
ln σ(r(ui, ea) −r(ui, eb)) + λ∥θ∥2
2
where λ∥θ∥2
2 is a data dependent L2 regularization term.
By minimizing O in Equation (9), we can estimate the rec-
ommendation parameter θ from the implicit feedback data.
5.2
The Optimization Algorithm
Notice that Equation (9) is diﬀerentiable, many optimiza-
tion techniques (e.g., SGD [2], BFGS-B method [3]) can be
utilized to estimate parameter θ.
The gradient of Equa-
tion (9) with respect to θ can be calculated as follows:
∂O
∂θ
=
−
X
ui∈U
X
(ea>eb)∈Ri
∂
∂θ σ(ri,ab) + λ
2
∂
∂θ ∥θ∥2
2
=
−
X
ui∈U
X
(ea>eb)∈Ri
e−ri,ab
1 + e−ri,ab
∂
∂θ ri,ab + λθ,
where ri,ab = r(ui, ea) −r(ui, eb).
Considering the data size of the real-world recommender
systems, with the above gradient, we employed the stochas-
tic gradient descent (SGD) method [2] to estimate the pa-
rameters in our empirical studies. Notice that the time com-
plexity of this proposed learning process is O(mn2) where
m is the number of users and n is the number of items. In
large datasets this can be overwhelming.
With SGD, we
only need to estimate the gradient with a very small subset
(10−5 sample rate) of training pairs sampled from R at each
iteration.
We discuss sample rate selection for parameter
estimation in Section 6.
5.3
Learning Personalized Recommendation
Models
As discussed in Section 4, the proposed global recommen-
dation model failed to distinguish individual interests and
behavior diﬀerences, and thus the quality of the results may
not be satisfying.
We observed that although users may
have diﬀerent interests from each other, a subgroup of users
can share similar interests or behavior patterns. Instead of
learning one global model, which cannot represent user in-
dividuality, or learning personalized models directly, which
can be time consuming and may cause model over-ﬁtting,
we propose to learn recommendation models for user sub-
groups. With recommendation models for user subgroups,
when making recommendations, we can calculate the per-
sonalized recommendation model for a target user by com-
bining the recommendation models he or she is most related
to, and generate recommendation results accordingly.
In order to learn recommendation models for user sub-
groups, we ﬁrst need to cluster users based on their inter-
ests and preferences, by examining the user implicit feed-
back data.
Considering the sparsity of R, we ﬁrst learn
low-rank representation for users by applying non-negative
matrix factorization on R directly. With the low dimension
user matrix U, we apply the well-studied k-means algorithm
with a cosine function as similarity measurement between
users, to ﬁnally cluster users into subgroups. For each clus-
ter, we apply the techniques we discussed above to learn a
recommendation model. The learning algorithm of person-
alized recommendation models can be found in Algorithm 1.
After estimating parameters of the recommendation mod-
els, given a target user, we can calculate the corresponding
personalized recommendation model with Equation (5), and
make personalized entity recommendation by using both the
personalized recommendation model and his or her personal
feedback data accordingly.
6.
EMPIRICAL STUDY
We present the empirical studies of the proposed rec-
ommendation framework in this section. We implemented
both global and personalized recommendation models pro-
posed in Section 3 and 4 along with several popularly de-
ployed or the state-of-the-art implicit feedback recommen-
dation techniques. We applied these methods on two real-
world datasets and performed a series of experiments to
demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed approach. We
present both experimental results and discussion with anal-
ysis.
Algorithm 1: Learning Personalized Recommendation
Models
// input:
implicit feedback and information
network
// output:
recommendation models for user
clusters
Input: R, G
Output: θ{·}
Prepare L meta-paths in the format of user −item
−∗−item
// User preference diffusion along meta-paths
for q ←1 to L do
foreach ui and ej do
˜R(q)
ui,ej = s(ui, ej|P(q)) (Equation (2))
end
Calculate latent features ˆU (q), ˆV (q) with ˜R(q)
(Equation (3))
end
// Clustering users into subgroups
Factorize R and derive U, V
C = k-means(U)
// Learn recommendation models
foreach Ck in C do
Optimize θ{k} with implicit feedback in user
subgroup Ck (Equation (9))
end
Name
#Items
#Users
#Ratings
#Entities
#Links
IM100K
943
1360
89,626
60,905
146,013
Yelp
11,537
43,873
229,907
285,317
570,634
(a) Datasets Description
(b) IMDb Feedback Distribu-
tion
(c) Yelp Feedback Distribu-
tion
Figure 5: IM100K and Yelp Datasets
6.1
Data
To demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed recom-
mendation framework, we choose two datasets from diﬀer-
ent domains (movie and local business) for empirical stud-
ies.
The ﬁrst dataset is built by combining the popular
MovieLens-100K dataset and the corresponding IMDb dataset
together. We name this dataset IMDb-MovieLens-100K
(IM100K). We use MovieLens user ratings as user feedback
and we build a corresponding heterogeneous information
network from the IMDb dataset.
If users watched a cer-
tain movie and wrote a review about this movie, no matter
whether they liked the movie or not, we say we observed the
user-item interaction and we set this feedback as 1, other-
wise, we set as 0. When building this dataset, we mapped
two datasets using titles and release date of the movies,
which could be erroneous on certain movies so the results
we presented below are lower-bound of the actual perfor-
mances.
Table 2: Meta-path examples (we set n = 1 and 2.
“biz” is short for “local business”)
Network
Meta-Path
IM100K
user−(movie−tag−movie)n
user−(movie−director−movie)n
user−(movie−genre−movie)n
user−movie−plot−movie
Yelp
user−(biz−category−movie)n
user−(biz−customer−biz)n
user−biz−checkin−biz
user−biz−location−biz
The second dataset is the Yelp challenge dataseta. This
dataset contains both user reviews and local business in-
formation (an information network). When a user wrote a
review for a restaurant, we set the feedback as 1, otherwise
it would be set to 0. We summarize these two datasets in
Figure 5(a) and the schema of which can be found in Fig-
ure 2. Notice that the Yelp dataset is much sparser than the
IM100K dataset, so the performances of all methods decline
accordingly. The distributions of the user feedback can be
found in Figure 5.
Both datasets have timestamps with each user item inter-
action. We split the feedback matrix R of both datasets for
each user into training and test based on timestamps, i.e.,
we use 80% of the “past” feedback to predict 20% of “future”
feedback. In Yelp dataset, we have to ﬁlter out all the users
who only have 1 review since we can not create training and
test data for such users.
6.2
Competitors and Evaluation Metrics
We implement several widely deployed or the state-of-the-
art recommendation approaches as comparison methods as
follows:
• Popularity: Recommend the popular items to users.
• Co-Click: Estimate conditional probabilities between
items and recommend items with an aggregated con-
ditional probability calculated using the training data
of the target user.
• NMF: Non-negative matrix factorization on R, details
of which is discussed in Section 2.3
• Hybrid-SVM: Use SVM-based ranking function [13]
to learn a global recommendation model with user im-
plicit feedback and meta-paths based similarity mea-
sures [24].
We use HeteRec-g to denote the proposed global recommen-
dation model and HeteRec-p to represent the personalized
recommendation models derived from user subgroup recom-
mendation models.
We utilize 10 diﬀerent meta-paths in
each information network, including the most simple meta-
path user −item, which means user preferences can only be
propagated to items with observed positive feedback. We list
some other meta-paths and / or attribute similarity mea-
sures in Table 6.1. For explicit feedback recommendation
evaluation, measures like root mean square error (RMSE)
are the standard evaluation metric.
However, these met-
rics do not suit the deﬁnition of implicit feedback problem.
In this study, we test all methods as ranking models and
use the well-studied information retrieval metrics includ-
ing precision-at-position and top-10 mean reciprocal rank
(MRR, Equation (10)) to evaluate and compare the perfor-
mance of these methods.
MRRK = 1
m
m
X
i=1


X
e∈test(ui)
1
rank(ui, e)


(10)
ahttp://www.yelp.com/dataset_challenge/
Table 3: Performance Comparison
Method
IM100K
Yelp
Prec1
Prec5
Prec10
MRR
Prec1
Prec5
Prec10
MRR
Popularity
0.0731
0.0513
0.0489
0.1923
0.00747
0.00825
0.00780
0.0228
Co-Click
0.0668
0.0558
0.0538
0.2041
0.0147
0.0126
0.01132
0.0371
NMF
0.2064
0.1661
0.1491
0.4938
0.0162
0.0131
0.0110
0.0382
Hybrid-SVM
0.2087
0.1441
0.1241
0.4493
0.0122
0.0121
0.0110
0.0337
HeteRec-g
0.2094
0.1791
0.1614
0.5249
0.0165
0.0144
0.0129
0.0422
HeteRec-p
0.2121
0.1932
0.1681
0.5530
0.0213
0.0171
0.0150
0.0513
6.3
Performance Comparison
The performance of all 6 methods in the two datasets can
be found in Table 3.
Based on Figure 5, user feedback data follow power law
distribution, i.e., a very small number of items have inter-
action with a large number of users. Due to this property,
recommending the popular items to users has a decent per-
formance (MRR=0.1923 in IM100K). Co-click method, as
one of the most widely deployed technique, achieves MRR
= 0.2041 in IM100K and has a similar performance as the
NMF method in Yelp (MRR=0.0371).
We implemented the NMF as the CF baseline (details
of this method can be found in Section 2.3).
We set the
dimensionality of the low-rank representations d = 20 in
IMD100K and d = 60 in Yelp with cross validation in train-
ing dataset. We use the same method and settings in the
diﬀusion-based latent feature generation method for the pro-
posed approaches. With parameter tuning and additional
information (e.g., [9]), NMF may perform better than the
results in Table 3. However, the same performance improve-
ment can be achieved in our methods accordingly by replac-
ing the NMF solver in Equation (3) with a more advanced
technique. As presented in Table 3, NMF achieved MRR =
0.4938 and Prec1 = 0.2061 in IM100K dataset and MRR =
0.0382 and Prec1 = 0.0162 in Yelp dataset. This method
outperforms other baselines methods in both datasets.
Hybrid-SVM method is a hybrid recommendation approach
which uses the same amount of information as our proposed
methods.
This method combines both implicit feedback
and heterogeneous relationship information following the in-
tuitions of our study.
However, it adopts an SVM based
ranking framework [13] and uses PathSim [24] measures as
features when deﬁning the recommendation model. With-
out the proposed diﬀusion-based feature generation method,
the learning algorithm and the recommendation model per-
sonalization, Hybrid-SVM can not fully take advantage of
the feedback data and the heterogeneity of the information
network.
This method can only achieve MRR = 0.4493
in IM100K (compared to 0.4938 with NMF) and MRR =
0.0337 (compared to 0.0371 with Co-Click method).
The
low-performance of the Hybrid-SVM method proves the ef-
fectiveness of the proposed framework.
Our proposed global recommendation model (HeteRec-g),
which takes advantage of both user feedback and the related
information network, and users the same amount of infor-
mation as Hybrid-SVM, beats all baseline methods in both
datasets. It improves MRR by 6.1% compared to NMF in
IM100K and 10.4% in Yelp dataset. This proves our assump-
tion that adding information network as external knowledge
with the proposed approach can alleviate the data spar-
sity issue and improve the recommendation quality. Mor-
ever, HeteRec-g produces much more accurate recommen-
dation results compared to Hybrid-SVM (in IM100K, MRR
of HeteRec-g is 0.5249 while MRR of Hybrid-SVM is only
0.4493). Both methods utilize the same set of meta-paths,
and use the same sample rate during training. Both meth-
ods deﬁne“global” recommendation models since they apply
the same model to all the users. The performance increase
of HeteRec-g proves the eﬀectiveness of our diﬀusion-based
latent feature generation method. Another interesting ob-
servation is that the MRR gain of HeteRec-g compared with
NMF in the relatively dense IM100K dataset is less than it is
in the sparer Yelp dataset (6.1% v.s. 10.4%), which ﬁts our
intuition that when feedback dataset is sparser, the informa-
tive network-based recommendation approach can improve
the performance even more. When training, we employ a
uniform sample rate 10−5 in SGD and we apply the same
rate to all supervised approaches in this experiment. Param-
eter tuning of the sample rate is discussed later this section.
HeteRec-p as the personalized recommendation approach
can further improve the performance in both datasets. HeteRec-
p method clusters users based on their interests and utilizes
personalized model parameters when recommending. This
approach can distinguish user behaviors while HeteRec-g
treats all users as the same.
We use c = 10 in IM100K
dataset and c = 100 in Yelp dataset. We discuss the strategy
of choosing the correct granularity later this section. Com-
pared with the global recommendation model (HeteRec-g),
personalized models can provide higher quality recommen-
dation results in both datasets. It improves Prec5 by 7.9%
and MRR by 5.4% in IM100K, and improves Prec1 by 29%
and MRR by 21.5% in Yelp. This veriﬁes that diﬀerent users
indeed have diﬀerent interests and behavior patterns. Ap-
plying global recommendation model to all users can not dis-
tinguish user diﬀerences properly. Recommendation mod-
els which are learned within user subgroups can represent
user interests and behaviors at a ﬁner granularity level, and
thus HeteRec-p can generates better results.
Compared
with baseline methods which only utilize user feedback data,
HeteRec-p surpasses NMF by 12.0% in terms of MRR in
IM100K and beats the MRR score of Co-Click by 38.3% in
Yelp dataset.
Overall, the proposed recommendation models outperform
all comparison methods in both IM100K and Yelp datasets.
The experiments verify that using heterogeneous informa-
tion networks in recommender systems can improve recom-
mendation quality.
Personalized recommendation models
can better distinguish user interests and behaviors, and thus
can lead to personalized and more accurate recommendation
results.
6.4
Performance Analysis
We analyze the performance of Co-Click, NMF, HeteRec-g
and HeteRec-p in diﬀerent recommendation scenarios. We
ran the following analytical experiments on both datasets
and observed similar performance change in both datasets.
Due to the page limitation, we only present these ﬁndings
with IM100K dataset.
We ﬁrst study the correlation between the performance
of diﬀerent recommendation methods and the training feed-
back data size of each user. We split all users into 6 groups
based on their individual training data size. Users in group
1 provided very limited number of feedback (average size
is 13) while users in group 6 provided the most amount of
(a) Performance
Change
with
User
Feedback Number
(b) Performance
Change
with
User
Feedback Popularity
(c) Local Model Cluster Number Tuning
Figure 6: Performance Analysis and Parameter Tuning
feedback (average size is 224). We apply all 4 methods in
each group. The results of this study can be found in Fig-
ure 6(a). One can notice that overall HeteRec-p outperforms
all the other methods for users with diﬀerent feedback sizes.
When the user feedback size is small, i.e., the data spar-
sity issue is severe, the performances of all methods are bad.
When the feedback size of each user increases, the perfor-
mances increase accordingly. The performance of Co-Click
however does not change as much among diﬀerent groups.
This proves that all CF based methods could be aﬀected
when data are sparse. When feedback data are insuﬃcient,
it is critical to utilize information network as external knowl-
edge to alleviate this issue.
We then study the correlation between performances of
the 4 methods and the popularity of the items that users
interacted in the feedback dataset.
We split users into 6
groups based on the average popularity of the movies they
interacted with in the training dataset. Users in group 1
prefer less popular movies (average popularity of items is
71) whle users in group 6 prefer the most popular movies
(average popularity is 281). The results of this study can be
found in Figure 6(b). Similar to the previous study, overall
HeteRec-p outperforms all the other methods for diﬀerent
user groups. Interestingly, all CF based methods perform
better for users who prefer unpopular movies.
This ﬁnd-
ing may be counter-intuitive. It would seem like popular
movies are easier to handle since the related data are suf-
ﬁcient. However, users who prefer popular movies usually
do not have speciﬁc interests (they watch anything popular
without considering genres, stories or any other types of in-
formation). Recommending movies to such users is always
challenging. One possible way of handling this problem is
to identify such users and use popularity based methods for
the recommendation.
6.5
Parameter Tuning
The proposed methods have several additional parameters
compared with other methods.
In Equation (9), λ controls L2 regularization of the func-
tion.
We cross-validated this parameter and set it to 0.1
when optimizing objective function. Another parameter is
the sampling rate in SGD when estimating parameters. As
mentioned in Section 5, with the proposed objective func-
tion, the scale of the training dataset is O(mn2) which can be
overwhelming in large datasets (this number in Yelp dataset
is approximately 1012). Instead of using the entire dataset,
we only sample a subset during training. We study the re-
lationship between the sample rate and the performance of
HeteRec-g in IM100K (Figure 7).
Notice the x-axis in Figure 7 is at log scale. When sam-
ple rate is more than 10−5, the performance of the global
Figure 7: Sample Rate Tuning
model is re