RNE: A Scalable Network Embedding for Billion-scale
Recommendation
Jianbin Lin1, Daixin Wang1,2, Lu Guan3, Yin Zhao3, Binqiang Zhao3, Jun Zhou1,
Xiaolong Li1, Yuan Qi1
1 Ant Financial Services Group, Hangzhou, China
2 Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3 Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
Abstract. Nowadays designing a real recommendation system has been a crit-
ical problem for both academic and industry. However, due to the huge number
of users and items, the diversity and dynamic property of the user interest, how
to design a scalable recommendation system, which is able to efﬁciently produce
effective and diverse recommendation results on billion-scale scenarios, is still
a challenging and open problem for existing methods. In this paper, given the
user-item interaction graph, we propose RNE, a data-efﬁcient Recommendation-
based Network Embedding method, to give personalized and diverse items to
users. Speciﬁcally, we propose a diversity- and dynamics-aware neighbor sam-
pling method for network embedding. On the one hand, the method is able to
preserve the local structure between the users and items while modeling the di-
versity and dynamic property of the user interest to boost the recommendation
quality. On the other hand the sampling method can reduce the complexity of
the whole method theoretically to make it possible for billion-scale recommen-
dation. We also implement the designed algorithm in a distributed way to further
improves its scalability. Experimentally, we deploy RNE on a recommendation
scenario of Taobao, the largest E-commerce platform in China, and train it on a
billion-scale user-item graph. As is shown on several online metrics on A/B test-
ing, RNE is able to achieve both high-quality and diverse results compared with
CF-based methods. We also conduct the ofﬂine experiments on Pinterest dataset
comparing with several state-of-the-art recommendation methods and network
embedding methods. The results demonstrate that our method is able to produce
a good result while runs much faster than the baseline methods.
1
Introduction
With the exponential growth of data and information on the Internet, recommendation
system plays a critical role in reducing information overload. Recommendation systems
are widely deployed on many online services, including E-commerce, social networks
and online news systems. How to design an effective recommendation system has been
a fundamental problem in both academia and industry.
The key for recommendation system is to model the users’ preferences based on
their interactions (e.g., clicks and rating) with the items. One of the most popular rec-
ommendation methods are known as collaborative ﬁltering (CF) [13]. Its basic idea is to
match the users with similar item preferences. Among the various collaborative ﬁlter-
ing methods, matrix factorization [11,26] is the mostly used one. However, these matrix
arXiv:2003.07158v2  [cs.IR]  9 Apr 2020
2
Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
factorization based methods are regarded as the linear methods, which are difﬁcult to
model the user-item interactions. Then following works use the deep neural networks to
model the user-item relationships [12]. Despite of their success, these CF-based meth-
ods only aim to model the direct links, i.e. the ﬁrst-order relationship between the users
and items. However, for a graph, only preserving the ﬁrst-order relationships between
the nodes is not enough to characterize the network structure and thus cannot achieve
good performance [5,2].
To preserve the second-order local structure in the networks, network embedding is
an effective way [5]. Network embedding aims to embed nodes into a low-dimensional
vector space with the goal of capturing the low-order and high-order topological charac-
teristics in graphs [17,20,10,21,25]. Although network embedding is able to incorporate
local structures, they mainly target on tasks of common link prediction and node clas-
siﬁcation. Few of them deal with the task of recommendation and thus they seldom
consider some speciﬁc properties of recommendation, which makes them difﬁcult to
get a good performance on recommendation. Last but not least, few of these methods
can be applied to the billion-scale networks.
To extend network embedding to recommendation, we meet three challenges. (1)
Diversity of user interest. User interest is always diverse and the diverse recommenda-
tion can help users explore new items of interest. Therefore, diversity has been a very
important measure to evaluate the recommendation system [1]. However, existing net-
work embedding methods seldom consider the diversity. (2) Dynamic changes of user
interest. User’s preference is dynamic and how to model such a dynamic property is an-
other challenge. (3) Scalability of recommendation system. Existing recommendation
scenario often has a huge number of users and items, which is a serious problem with a
scale beyond most of existing network embedding methods.
To address these challenges, we propose RNE, a scalable Recommendation-based
Network Embedding method. In our method, when discovering the local structure of a
user, we will not model all the items the user clicked. Instead, we propose a sampling
method, which considers the diversity and dynamics of the user interest, to sample a
portion of the items the user has clicked as the user’s neighbors. In this way, the sam-
pling method not only can incorporate the important properties of recommendation, i.e.
the diversity and dynamics, to improve the recommendation accuracy, but also reduce
the computational complexity of the algorithm. Furthermore, we deploy the algorithm
on a recommendation system based on the Parameter Server to do distributed and par-
allel computing, which further facilitates the large-scale training available.
In summary, the contributions of the paper can be listed as follows:
– We propose a network-embedding-based recommendation method, named RNE.
When modeling the local structures between the users and items, our method is
able to incorporate the dynamics and diversity of the user interest to produce more
accurate and diverse recommendation results.
– We implement our recommendation algorithm in a distributed way based on pa-
rameter server, which jointly makes the system available for billion-scale recom-
mendation.
– Experimentally, we deploy the whole system on a recommendation scenario of
Taobao. Online A/B tests demonstrate that our method is able to achieve more
RNE: A Scalable Network Embedding for Billion-scale Recommendation
3
accurate results compared with CF and greatly improve the diversity of the rec-
ommendation results. Experiments on ofﬂine dataset Pinterest also demonstrate the
quality of our method.
Table 1. Multifaceted Comparisons between different methods
Method
Local-structure Preserving Diversity Billion-scale Complexity
GMF-CF/MLP-CF/NCF
×
×
×
O(|E|)
LINE/node2vec
√
×
×
O(|E|)
RNE
√
√
√
O(|V |)
2
Related Work
2.1
Collaborative Filtering
Recommendation algorithms and systems are well-investigated research ﬁelds. In our
work, we are only given the user-item interaction data. Therefore, we mainly introduce
the CF-based recommendation methods and omit the discussions of content-based rec-
ommendation methods and the hybrid recommendation methods.
Collaborative Filtering exploits the interaction graph between the users and items
to give the recommendation lists to users. Its basic idea is to match the users which
have similar item preferences. Earlier CF methods mainly use the matrix factorization
on the user-item matrices to obtain the latent user factors and item factors [6,11,18].
The user factors and item factors together aim to reconstruct the original user-item
matrices. However, the matrix factorization is just the linear-based methods, which is
difﬁcult to capture the user-item relationships. To overcome such a drawback, following
works use the deep neural networks to perform collaborative ﬁltering [22,19]. However,
most of the CF-based methods only aim to model the pairwise relationships between
the user and item but omit their local structures. And many graph-based works have
demonstrate that local structures like second-order relationships are very important for
capturing graph structures [20]. In this way, existing CF-based methods are sub-optimal
for capturing the relationships between user and items.
2.2
Network Representation Learning
Network embedding has been demonstrated as an effective methods for modeling local
and global structures of a graph. It aims to learn a low-dimensional vector-representation
for each node. DeepWalk [17] and Node2vec [10] propose to use the random walk and
skip-gram to learn the node representations. LINE [20] and SDNE [21] propose ex-
plicit objective functions for preserving ﬁrst- and second-order proximity. Some fur-
ther works [16,2] use the matrix factorization to factorize high-order relation matrix.
Aforementioned methods are designed for homogeneous networks. Then some follow-
ing embedding methods for heterogeneous networks are proposed, like Metapath2vec
[7] , HNE [4], BiNE [8] and EOE [24]. Some works further focuses on knowledge graph
embedding [23]. Although these network embedding methods are able to preserve the
local structures of the vertices, most of them are not speciﬁcally designed for the task
of recommendation. They do not consider some speciﬁc properties of the recommenda-
tion tasks like the diversity and dynamic changes of user interest, the scalability issues
of large-scale recommendation tasks. Therefore, how to propose an effective network
embedding method for billion-scale recommendation is still an open problem.
4
Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
In summary, we compare our method and the related works in Table 1. Our method
is speciﬁcally designed for the recommendation scenario and thus consider some spe-
ciﬁc properties. Furthermore, the proposed method is very scalable and thus can apply
to billion-scale recommendations.
3
The Methodology
In our scenario, we have a large number of users and items. Each user may have differ-
ent ways to interact with the items. For example, the user may view the items, collect
the items or buy the items. In this way, we can build the user-item interaction graph, for-
mally formulated as G = (U, I, E). Here U denotes the total of n users and I denotes
the total of T items. U ∪I denotes the set of nodes in G. If a user u ∈U views, collects
or buys an item i ∈I, there is an edge Eui between u and i. We use E(v), v ∈U ∪I to
denote the edges connected to the node v. We assume that G is connected. The recom-
mendation problem is that given a user u, we hope to recommend some personalized
items to the user based on his previous behavior.
…
user !
item "#
item "$
item "%
&("#|!)
&("$|!)
&("%|!)
*+
*,-
*,.
*,/
Fig. 1. The framework of RNE.
3.1
Network Embedding for Recommendation
Given the user-item interaction graph G = (U, I, E), we aim to map each user and item
to a common low-dimensional latent space, where user u can be embedded as Eu
U ∈Rd
and item i can be embedded as Ei
I ∈Rd. Then with the embeddings for each user and
item, we can retrieve the similar items for the user as his recommendation results.
To achieve this, we propose our method, whose framework can be shown in Figure
1. It consists of the embedding-lookup layer, embedding layer and softmax layer. The
embedding-lookup layer helps us obtain the embeddings for the users and items. The
embedding layer and softmax layer together model the interactions between the users
and items to update the embedding-lookup layer. Then we introduce the designed loss
functions to update the embeddings.
We ﬁrst consider how to model the local structure of a user in the given user-item
graph. In the original space, the empirical distributions given a user can be deﬁned as:
ˆp(i|u) = wui
du
,
(1)
where wui is the weight between user u and item i and du is the degree of user u.
Then we hope to estimate the local structure of a user in the embedding space.
Word2vec [15] inspires us to use the inner product between two vertices to model their
RNE: A Scalable Network Embedding for Billion-scale Recommendation
5
interactions. Then in our work, given a user u, we deﬁne the probability of item i gen-
erated by user u as:
p(i|u) =
exp(EuT
U Ei
I)
P|I|
j=1 exp(Eu
U
T Ej
I)
,
(2)
where T means the transpose of a matrix.
Eqn. 2 is a softmax-like loss function, which deﬁnes the conditional distributions
p(·|u) of user u over its neighborhoods, i.e. the entire item set, in the embedding space.
With the empirical distributions on the original network and reconstructed distri-
butions on the embedding space, we can learn the embedding by making the deﬁned
probability p(·|u) speciﬁed by the low-dimensional representations be close to the em-
pirical distributions ˆp(·|u). We use the KL-divergence to measure the distance between
the distributions. Then the loss functions can be deﬁned as:
L =
X
u∈U
λuKL(ˆp(·|u), p(·|u)) ∝−
X
(u,i)∈E
wuilogp(i|u),
(3)
where λu denotes the prestige of user u and we set λu = du.
Minimizing Eq. 3 will make the vertices with similar neighbors similar to each
other. Therefore, it can not only model the observed links on the graph, but also preserve
the local structures for each node.
3.2
Recommendation-based Sub-sampling
However, aforementioned network embedding meets two challenges for large-scale rec-
ommendation: (1) Minimizing Eqn. 3 is time-consuming since for each edge it needs
to run over the entire set of the items when evaluating p(i|u). In this way, the whole
complexity is O(|E||I|), which is unbearable for real recommendation systems. (2)
Minimizing Eqn. 3 only considers the topology of the graph. It does not consider the
diversity and the time decay of the user interest, which are very important properties for
recommendation systems.
To reduce the complexity, we ﬁrst adopt negative sampling as many methods do
[20]. For each positive edge (u, i), we will sample some negative edges according to
predeﬁned distributions Pui. By performing negative sampling, the objective function
for each edge (u, i) can be reformulated as:
Lui = log(σ(Eu
U
T Ei
I)) +
k
X
j=1
Eij∼Pu(log(σ(Eu
U
T Eij
I ))),
(4)
where k is the number of negative samples for each user-item pair, Pui ∝d3/4
i
.
Although negative sampling can reduce the time complexity from O(|E||I|) to
O(k|E|), for billion-scale recommendation, a complexity linear to the number of edges
is still a great challenge.
To further reduce the complexity, we only select a portion of the items the user has
clicked to obtain his behavior sequence. Then the question comes to how to select the
items to effectively represent the user’s interest. Here, we mainly consider two prop-
erties speciﬁed for recommendation. (1) The diversity of user interest: User interest is
always diverse. A user will always focus on the items of more than one cluster. (2) The
6
Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
time decay of user interest: User interest is always dynamic. More recent user behav-
ior is more reliable to reﬂect the recent user interest. Therefore, we should more focus
on recent user behavior. Based on these two considerations, we deﬁne the selection
probability for each user-item pair (u, i) as follows:
p(u, i) = 0.999ti ∗click(u, ci)γ,
(5)
where ti is the hours of the item i from the most recent item, ci is the cluster index
of item i and click(u, ci) = P
j∈ci wuj, γ is set to −0.2. Then for each user, we
will sample m samples according to the deﬁned probability in Eqn. 5 to represent his
behavior sequence. Then in this way, the complexity can be reduced from O(k|E|) to
O(km|U|), which is linear to the number of nodes.
In summary, on the one hand, if a user more recently shows the interest to an item,
the item should have a larger probability to be sampled. On the other hand, the method
is prone to sample the items of the clusters clicked less times by the user. In this way,
our method may cover more clusters to ensure the diversity. Therefore, such a sampling
strategy can simultaneously model the diversity and time decay of the user interest
Furthermore, with the sampling strategy, we do not need to model all the edges in one
iteration but instead for each user we only model a portion of its preferred items as the
user’s behavior sequence. It signiﬁcantly reduce the time complexity.
3.3
Implementation
In this section, we will introduce the technical implementation of the proposed RNE.
The whole process can be divided into two phases: ofﬂine model training and online
retrieval. The proposed RNE is implemented and deployed on KunPeng platform [3].
This section will describe them in detail.
Off-line Model Training To train the proposed RNE, we utilize the Stochastic Gradi-
ent Descent (SGD) on the loss function of Eqn. 4 to update the node embeddings. In
detail, we use Epos to denote all the positive edges sampled by the method we proposed
before. Then for each (u, i) ∈Epos, we can update their embeddings as follows:
Eu
U = Eu
U + λ{
X
z∈{i}∪Nk
neg(u)
[I(z, u) −σ(Eu
U
T Ez
U)] · Ez
U},
(6)
where I(a, b) is the indicator function that if a = b, I(a, b) = 1, otherwise I(a, b) = 0.
N k
neg(i) is the negative neighborhoods of vertex i. λ denotes the learning rate. Similarly,
we can update embedding Ei
I for an item i in a similar way, which we will not discussed
more.
From Eqn. 6, when given a positive edge, we can update their embeddings. Then
we will go over all the pair of positive edges for several iterations to update their em-
beddings. The whole algorithm can be summarized in Alg. 1.
From Alg. 1, we ﬁnd that the learning process from Line 4 to Line 6 is indepen-
dent for different edges, which inspires us to use some parallelization mechanism to
implement it. Then we deploy the whole algorithm on the parameter server, which im-
plements a data-parallelization mechanism. In detail, from Eqn. 6 we ﬁnd that to update
a node’s embedding, we only need to know the node’s previous embeddings, the node’s
neighborhoods and their embeddings. Therefore, we can resort to parameter server to
RNE: A Scalable Network Embedding for Billion-scale Recommendation
7
Algorithm 1 Training Algorithm for RNE
Input: G = (U, I, E)
Output: Eu, EI
1: Initializing Eu and EI.
2: while not converged do
3:
Construct the positive edge set Spos according to G = (U, I, E) and Eq. 5.
4:
for all (u, i) ∈Spos do
5:
Construct the negative set N k
neg(u).
6:
Update Eu and Ei according to Eq. 6.
7:
end for
8: end while
implement such a process in a parallelized way. The main workﬂow of the system is
built as follows: (1) In each iteration, the server will assign each worker a subset of the
vertices of the graph G. (2) Each worker will pull the assigned vertices from the server
and calculate the positive and negative neighborhoods for the assigned vertices. Then
with positive and negative sets, each worker can update the embeddings of the assigned
vertices according to Eqn 6. (3) After updating, each worker will push his assigned
vertices’ embddings to the server. Such a training process will be iterated several times.
Online Efﬁcient Nearest Neighbor Search For online recommendation, we use the
nearest neighbor search on the learned embedding space to make recommendations.
That is, given a query user u, we can recommend items whose embeddings are the
K-nearest-neighbors (K-nn) of the query user’s embedding Eu. To achieve the K-nn
search, we use the Faiss library [14] which is an efﬁcient implementation for state-of-
the-art product-quantization methods. Given that RNE is trained ofﬂine and all the user
and item embeddings are computed via Parameter Server and saved in database, the
efﬁcient K-nn search enables the system to recommend items online.
4
Experiments
The goal of RNE is to produce high-quality and scalable recommendations for real-
world systems. Therefore, we conduct comprehensive experiments in two ways: Online
A/B tests and Ofﬂine experiments.
4.1
Datasets
We use two real-world datasets, i.e. Ali-mobile taobao and Pinterest in this paper.
– Ali-mobile taobao: It is a mobile recommendation scenario deployed on Taobao,
the largest E-commerce platform in China. The dataset is extremely large. It has
about 1 billion users, tens of million items and a total of about one hundred billion
edges. Each edge denotes whether the user has clicked the products. We deploy our
algorithm on the service to do online A/B test to evaluate our method.
– Pinterest: The dataset is an image recommendation dataset constructed by [9]. We
ﬁlter the users which have very few interactions with the items and only retain the
users which have more than 20 interactions. After the pre-processing, the dataset
consists of 50 thousand users, 10 thousand items and 1.5 million user-item edges.
Each edge denotes whether the user has pinned the items.
8
Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
4.2
Online A/B tests
The ultimate goal of the recommendation system is to lift the user’s interest in the items.
Therefore, we perform random A/B experiments on Ali-mobile taobao to demonstrate
this, where a random set of users obtain the recommendation results of RNE and another
obtain the results of CF-based methods. Any difference in the engagement of the items
between the two groups can truly reﬂect the recommendation quality of two methods.
Note that here we only use one baseline because deploying many methods online to
do A/B tests will cost a lot of resources. And the reason why we choose CF is that it is
well investigated for recommendation and existing network embedding methods cannot
scale to billion-scale dataset. For more comparisons with state-of-the-art methods, we
do ofﬂine experiment, which we will introduce in detail later.
We use the following six metrics to measure the recommendation quality.
– AVD (Averaged View Depth): The metric denotes how deep a user views the page.
It measures the recommendation quality.
– ACN (Averaged Click Number): The metric measures the number of clicks on the
items for each user in average. It measures the recommendation quality.
– P-CTR (Page Click-through Rate): for a page p, pctr = #click−throughs(p)
#impressions(p) ×100%.
It measures the recommendation quality.
– U-CTR (User Click-through Rate): for a user u, uctr =
#click−throughs(u)
#impressions(u)
×
100%. It measures the recommendation quality.
– Re-C (Recommended number of clusters): The averaged number of clusters recom-
mended to users. The clusters are obtained by using our clustering algorithm. The
metric measures the recommendation diversity.
– CK-C (Clicked number of clusters): The averaged number of clusters clicked by
users. It measures both the recommendation quality and the diversity.
Table 2. Performance of online A/B tests on Ali-mobile taobao
Metrics
AVD
ACN
P-CTR U-CTR
Re-C
CK-C
Ali-mobile taobao 9.54% 13.21% 4.99% 1.12% 20.49% 16.32%
Table 2 summarizes the lift in engagement of items recommended by RNE com-
pared with CF-based methods in controlled A/B experiments. From Table 2, we have
the following observations and analysis:
– We ﬁnd that RNE can achieve a signiﬁcant improvement in terms of AVD and ACN
over the CF. It indicates by using the results of RNE, users are more willing to go
deeper to view more items and click more items, which indirectly demonstrates the
ranking quality of RNE.
– In terms of the two CTR metrics, a popular and well-accepted metric to evaluate
the recommendation quality, our proposed method also achieves a better result than
CF. It further demonstrates that RNE is able to produce personalized items for
users. The reason for a better recommendation quality is twofold. (1) Our method
is able to capture the local structures between the users and items. (2) Our method
considers the dynamic change of the user’s interest.
RNE: A Scalable Network Embedding for Billion-scale Recommendation
9
– We ﬁnd that RNE achieves a higher Re-C compared with CF, which indicates that
our recommended results are from more clusters. The reason is that our proposed
method incorporates the diversity issue into the model design.
– More importantly, our method achieves a higher CK-C than CF, which demon-
strates that not only our method can produce more diverse recommendations, but
also the users are willing to click these diverse recommended items. It indicates
that our method is able to improve the recommendation quality while improving
the recommendation diversity.
– Under the billion-scale scenario, RNE can be deployed online and still obtain good
results, which demonstrates the superiority of our method.
4.3
Showcase
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2. Real showcase on Ali-mobile taobao: Given an item (in red box), searching for the nearest
8 items (in blue box) using the embeddings learned by RNE.
In this section, we give some showcase to see some intuitions regarding the embed-
dings we learn. After the learning process of RNE, all the items will have embeddings.
Then in this experiment, given a query item’s embedding, we aim to ﬁnd the most
similar 8 items whose embeddings have the smallest distance with the query. Then we
display both the query image and the recommended images in Figure 2.
In Figure 2(a), the query item is a princess-style educational toy for girls. When we
look at the returned results, these images belong to different categories with the query,
like plasticine and origami. But all of them are for fun and a majority of them are also
princess-style. It demonstrates that our method is able to ﬁnd more categories of items
but retain the primary style of the item. In Figure 2(b), the query item is a woman sweat-
shirt of the brand of Peacebird. The returned images are all coat, sweater or sweatshirt
of the brand of Peacebird or Only. Similarly, the returned images and the query image
are all casual style but belong to different ﬁne-grained categories. Moreover, actually
the brand of Peacebird and Only have very similar styles and our method can learn their
inherit relationships.
In summary, in our method, we do not have the item features and the direct relation-
ships between items. We are only given the user-item interaction graph. Although in
this case, our method still can model the item relationships by using the user behaviors
10
Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
as the bridge. It demonstrates that by using the network embedding method we propose,
the learned embeddings can capture the local relationships between the entities.
4.4
Ofﬂine Experiment
Table 3. Recommendation Performance on Pinterest.
Method
HR
NDCG
RR
Top5 Top10 Top50 Top100 Top5 Top10 Top50 Top100 Top5 Top10 Top50 Top100
GMF
0.501 0.678
0.9
0.97
0.332 0.386 0.425
0.434
0.276 0.292 0.301
0.307
MLP
0.504 0.679 0.908
0.99
0.341 0.385 0.426
0.436
0.275 0.295 0.302
0.309
NCF
0.529 0.688 0.912
0.99
0.35 0.405 0.443
0.454
0.298 0.32
0.343
0.341
LINE
0.536
0.7
0.91
0.99
0.353 0.409 0.448
0.455
0.297 0.325 0.334
0.335
node2vec 0.527 0.691
0.93
0.99
0.355 0.411 0.459
0.46
0.302 0.329 0.341
0.342
RNE
0.531 0.695 0.925
0.99
0.356 0.41
0.45
0.457
0.3
0.327 0.345
0.348
To compare more baselines to get comprehensive results, we conduct the ofﬂine
experiments on the dataset of Pinterest. We randomly sample 90% user-item pairs as the
training set and the rest as the testset. For training set, we use 9-fold cross-validation
to tune the parameters for all the methods. Note that in this dataset, we do not have
the cluster and time information for the item. So we uniformly sample the items to do
training. To evaluate the performance, we use the following three metrics: Normalized
Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG), Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) and Hit Rate
(HR). NDCG and MRR will consider the rank of the hit and will assign higher scores
to hits at top ranks. While HR will only evaluate whether the test items are hit or not.
We calculate all the metrics for the test users and report the average score.
We ﬁrst use the advanced CF-based methods GMF, MLP and NCF [12] as base-
line methods. We perform the same process of parameter search as the work [12] did
to select the optimal parameters. For network embedding methods, since we only have
the graph topology, in this case LINE [20] and node2vec [10] are state-of-the-art net-
work embedding methods, so we choose them as the baselines. For LINE, we use
LINE1st+2nd with the default parameter settings. For node2vec, we also use the de-
fault settings except for the bias parameters p, q, which we conduct the grid search
from {0.5, 1}. The embedding dimension of them is all set as 128.
The results are shown in Table 3. From Table. 3, we ﬁnd that RNE achieves a better
performance than all the CF-based methods. The reason is that RNE is able to capture
the local structure of each user while CF-based methods only focus on the direct links
the user has clicked. It demonstrates that capturing the local structures on the user-
item graph is important for recommendation. LINE, node2vec and RNE achieve similar
performance in different evaluation metrics and scenarios. But our method runs much
faster than node2vec and LINE, which will be discussed later. Therefore, RNE is a
better balance between accuracy and efﬁciency.
Now we discuss the training time of LINE, node2vec and RNE. For a fair compar-
ison, we do not use the distributed strategy for RNE. From Figure 3, we ﬁnd that RNE
can boost the running time over LINE and node2vec. Speciﬁcally, when the training
edges increase from 0.15 million to 1.5 million, the running time improvement of RNE
RNE: A Scalable Network Embedding for Billion-scale Recommendation
11
2x
3.1x
4.4x
Fig. 3. Time comparisons on Pinterest dataset. We change the number of edges to be trained and
report the training time for each network embedding method.
compared with LINE will be larger and larger, from 2x to 4.4x. When the edges con-
tinuously increase to the billion-scale dataset like the Ali-mobile taobao dataset, it is
difﬁcult for LINE and node2vec to obtain the results. But RNE can still obtain a good
result. The reasons why our method can scale to billion-scale dataset are twofold: (1)
The proposed sampling method avoids us running over all the edges in the graph. (2)
Our method can be deployed on distributed system for parallel computations.
In summary, RNE has a good scalability, which is much more efﬁciency than base-
line methods and can scale to billion-scale recommendation scenario, meanwhile RNE
do not sacriﬁce its recommendation accuracy.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a novel network embedding method named RNE for scalable
recommendation. The proposed network embedding method is able to capture the local
structures on the user-item graph to achieve a better recommendation quality. Speciﬁ-
cally, to consider the speciﬁc properties for recommendation, i.e the diversity and time-
decay of user interest, we design a sampling method for embedding process to incor-
porate these properties. And the sampling method also guarantees the scalability of the
proposed method while almost preserving the recommendation quality. We also deploy
our algorithm on parameter server to make it available for large-scale recommendation.
Experimental results on online A/B tests and ofﬂine experiments all demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed method.
For the future work, we may consider the user and item features, which can further
address the sparsity and cold-start problem. We also want to analyze the role of features
and topology structures for recommendation.
6
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank all the colleagues of our team and all the members of our coop-
erative team: the search engine team in Alibaba. They provide many helpful comments
for the paper. We also would like to thank the support of the Initiative Postdocs Sup-
porting Program and the valuable comments provided by all the reviewers.
12
Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
References
1. Adomavicius, G., Kwon, Y.O.: Improving aggregate recommendation diversity using
ranking-based techniques. TKDE 24(5), 896–911 (2012)
2. Cao, S., Lu, W., Xu, Q.: Grarep: Learning graph representations with global structural infor-
mation. In: CIKM. pp. 891–900 (2015)
3. J. Zhou, X. Li, P. Zhao, C. Chen, L. Li, X. Yang, Q. Cui, J. Yu, X. Chen, Y. Ding et al.,
“Kunpeng: Parameter server based distributed learning systems and its applications in al-
ibaba and ant ﬁnancial,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
ACM, 2017, pp. 1693–1702.
4. Chang, S., Han, W., Tang, J., Qi, G.J., Aggarwal, C.C., Huang, T.S.: Heterogeneous network
embedding via deep architectures. In: SIGKDD. pp. 119–128. ACM (2015)
5. Cui, P., Wang, X., Pei, J., Zhu, W.: A survey on network embedding. TKDE (2018)
6. Deshpande, M., Karypis, G.: Item-based top- n recommendation algorithms. Acm
Trans.inf.syst 22(1), 143–177 (2004)
7. Dong, Y., Chawla, N.V., Swami, A.: metapath2vec: Scalable representation learning for het-
erogeneous networks. In: SIGKDD. pp. 135–144. ACM (2017)
8. Gao, M., Chen, L., He, X., Zhou, A.: Bine: Bipartite network embedding (2018)
9. Geng, X., Zhang, H., Bian, J., Chua, T.S.: Learning image and user features for recommen-
dation in social networks. In: ICCV. pp. 4274–4282 (2015)
10. Grover, A., Leskovec, J.: node2vec:scalable feature learning for networks. In: SIGKDD. pp.
855–864 (2016)
11. Harvey, M., Carman, M.J., Ruthven, I., Crestani, F.: Bayesian latent variable models for
collaborative item rating prediction. In: CIKM. pp. 699–708 (2011)
12. He, X., Liao, L., Zhang, H., Nie, L., Hu, X., Chua, T.S.: Neural collaborative ﬁltering pp.
173–182 (2017)
13. Herlocker, J.L., Konstan, J.A., Terveen, L.G., Riedl, J.T.: Evaluating collaborative ﬁltering
recommender systems. Acm Transactions on Information Systems 22(1), 5–53 (2004)
14. Johnson, J., Douze, M., J´egou, H.: Billion-scale similarity search with gpus. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.08734 (2017)
15. Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J.: Efﬁcient estimation of word representations in
vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013)
16. Ou, M., Cui, P., Pei, J., Zhang, Z., Zhu, W.: Asymmetric transitivity preserving graph em-
bedding. In: SIGKDD. pp. 1105–1114 (2016)
17. Perozzi, B., Al-Rfou, R., Skiena, S.: Deepwalk: Online learning of social representations. In:
SIGKDD. pp. 701–710. ACM (2014)
18. Sarwar, B., Karypis, G., Konstan, J., Riedl, J.: Item-based collaborative ﬁltering recommen-
dation algorithms. In: International Conference on World Wide Web. pp. 285–295 (2001)
19. Strub, F., Mary, J.: Collaborative ﬁltering with stacked denoising autoencoders and sparse
inputs. In: NIPS Workshop on Machine Learning for eCommerce (2015)
20. Tang, J., Qu, M., Wang, M., Zhang, M., Yan, J., Mei, Q.: Line: Large-scale information
network embedding. In: WWW. pp. 1067–1077 (2015)
21. Wang, D., Cui, P., Zhu, W.: Structural deep network embedding. In: SIGKDD. pp. 1225–
1234 (2016)
22. Wu, Y., Dubois, C., Zheng, A.X., Ester, M.: Collaborative denoising auto-encoders for top-n
recommender systems pp. 153–162 (2016)
23. Xiao, H., Huang, M., Zhu, X.: Transg: A generative model for knowledge graph embedding.
In: Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers). vol. 1, pp. 2316–2325 (2016)
RNE: A Scalable Network Embedding for Billion-scale Recommendation
13
24. Xu, L., Wei, X., Cao, J., Yu, P.S.: Embedding of embedding (eoe): Joint embedding for cou-
pled heterogeneous networks. In: Proceedings of the Tenth ACM International Conference
on Web Search and Data Mining. pp. 741–749. ACM (2017)
25. Zhang, Z., Cui, P., Li, H., Wang, X., Zhu, W.: Billion-scale network embedding with iterative
random projection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.02396 (2018)
26. Zhou, X., Chen, L., Zhang, Y., Qin, D., Cao, L., Huang, G., Wang, C.: Enhancing online
video recommendation using social user interactions. VLDBJ 26(5), 637–656 (2017)
