Scalable Semantic Matching of Queries to Ads
in Sponsored Search Advertising
Mihajlo Grbovic, Nemanja Djuric,
Vladan Radosavljevic, Fabrizio Silvestri,
Ricardo Baeza-Yates
Yahoo Labs, Sunnyvale, CA, USA
{mihajlo, nemanja, vladan, silvestr,
rby}@yahoo-inc.com
Andrew Feng, Erik Ordentlich,
Lee Yang, Gavin Owens
Yahoo Hadoop Group, Sunnyvale, CA, USA
{afeng, eord, leewyang,
gowens}@yahoo-inc.com
ABSTRACT
Sponsored search represents a major source of revenue for
web search engines. This popular advertising model brings a
unique possibility for advertisers to target users’ immediate
intent communicated through a search query, usually by dis-
playing their ads alongside organic search results for queries
deemed relevant to their products or services. However, due
to a large number of unique queries it is challenging for ad-
vertisers to identify all such relevant queries. For this reason
search engines often provide a service of advanced matching,
which automatically ﬁnds additional relevant queries for ad-
vertisers to bid on.
We present a novel advanced match-
ing approach based on the idea of semantic embeddings of
queries and ads. The embeddings were learned using a large
data set of user search sessions, consisting of search queries,
clicked ads and search links, while utilizing contextual infor-
mation such as dwell time and skipped ads. To address the
large-scale nature of our problem, both in terms of data and
vocabulary size, we propose a novel distributed algorithm for
training of the embeddings. Finally, we present an approach
for overcoming a cold-start problem associated with new ads
and queries. We report results of editorial evaluation and on-
line tests on actual search traﬃc. The results show that our
approach signiﬁcantly outperforms baselines in terms of rel-
evance, coverage, and incremental revenue. Lastly, we open-
source learned query embeddings to be used by researchers
in computational advertising and related ﬁelds.
Keywords
Sponsored search; ad retrieval; word embeddings.
1.
INTRODUCTION
The remarkable growth of the Internet in the last decades
has brought huge beneﬁts to its users, allowing easy, one-
click access to all kinds of information and services. How-
ever, along with the increase in size and variety of the web
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c⃝2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911538
there inevitably came the increase in its complexity, which
left many users lost in the immense digital jungle of web
content. To mitigate the situation, very early in the web’s
existence there appeared search engines such as Altavista,
AOL, or Lycos, that allowed users to easily browse and dis-
cover webpages of interest. The service has evolved and im-
proved signiﬁcantly since these beginnings, and today search
engines represent one of the most popular web services.
Advertisers are interested in making use of the vast busi-
ness potential that the search engines oﬀer.
Via issued
search query users communicate a very clear intent that al-
lows for eﬀective ad targeting. This idea is embodied in the
sponsored search model [19], where advertisers sponsor the
top search results in order to redirect user’s attention from
original (or organic) search results to ads that are highly rel-
evant to the entered query. Sponsored search drives signiﬁ-
cant portions of traﬃc to websites, and accounted for 46% of
overall online advertising spend of astonishing $121 billion
in 2014 alone1. Moreover, with the advent of handheld de-
vices the sponsored search also made a successful transition
to mobile platforms. Here, it equally shares the advertising
market with display ad formats, and is projected to reach
$12.85 billion spend in 20152.
The booking process for ad campaigns in sponsored search
is typically self-served. This means that the advertisers cre-
ate their own ads by providing ad creative to be shown to
the users (comprising concise title, description, and display
URL), along with ancillary ad parameters that are visible
only to the web search publisher. These include the list of
bid terms (i.e., queries for which advertisers wish to show
their ad) and their bid values (i.e., monetary amounts they
are willing to pay if the ad is shown and clicked). In the
model currently used by most major search engines, in a case
that multiple advertisers are competing for the same query
the selected ads enter a generalized second price (GSP) auc-
tion [10], where the winner pays the runner-up’s bid value
when a user clicks on the shown ad.
The principal strategy for ad selection is based on ex-
plicit matching of user search queries to all the bid terms
in the system, referred to as exact match.
Provided that
the advertiser-deﬁned bid terms are indeed relevant to the
ad, exact match ensures that advertisers interact only with
the relevant audience. However, as it is nearly impossible
for advertisers to explicitly list all commercially relevant bid
1zenithoptimedia.com, accessed January 2016
2emarketer.com, accessed January 2016
Table 1: Examples of variant and broad match queries
Ad title
Host a Fun Murder Mystery Party
Huge selection of fun murder mystery
Ad
games for all ages, groups. #1 site for
description instant downloads and boxed sets of
exciting murder mystery party games!
Bid term
murder mystery party
Variant
murder mystery parties
matches
murder mistery party
murder mystery dinner
murder mystery parties at home
Broad
murder mystery dinner party
matches
how to host a mystery party
friends game night
detective games
murder mystery games for parties
terms, it may also limit user reach and lead to lower traﬃc
volume for the advertiser [14]. This can clearly result in lost
opportunities and revenue for both the search engine and the
advertisers. To address this problem a service of advanced
matching is usually oﬀered to the advertisers.
More speciﬁcally, with advertiser’s permission search en-
gines attempt to match ads to related queries not explic-
itly provided by the advertisers, by implementing variant
and broad match techniques (illustrated in Table 1). Vari-
ant match looks for slight variations of the bid term (e.g.,
typos, inﬂections), typically by leveraging Levenshtein dis-
tance [24]. Broad match is a more involved process of match-
ing queries to advertiser-provided bid terms that do not nec-
essarily have any words in common, yet have same or similar
meaning (e.g., query “running machine” and bid term “ellip-
tical trainer”). Existing techniques include expanding user
query to ﬁnd similar queries that can be matched exactly
to existing bid terms, commonly referred to as query rewrit-
ing [4, 15], or computing similarity between query and text
in ad title and description. Query rewriting approaches are
limited to matching only against deﬁned bid terms and may
not be suitable in cases when advertisers do not provide rel-
evant bid terms to begin with. On the other hand, matching
queries to ads based solely on textual information is prob-
lematic in case when no common words can be found.
In this paper we describe a novel broad match technique
that was recently deployed in sponsored search system of
Yahoo Search, which eﬀectively and eﬃciently addresses the
shortcomings of the existing broad match techniques. Mo-
tivated by recent advances in distributed neural language
models [2, 8, 25, 28], we aim at learning low-dimensional
continuous representations of queries and ads in a common
vector space. To do so we rely on the search sessions, de-
ﬁned as sequences of queries, ad clicks and search link clicks
performed by a particular user, and leverage surrounding
context of queries and ads in a session to learn vectors that
best describe them. As a result ads and queries which oc-
curred in similar contexts will have similar representations,
and ﬁnding relevant ads for a speciﬁc query amounts to a
simple K nearest neighbor search in the learned embedding
space, without ever considering the text in queries and ads.
Compared to our previous work [15], novel contributions
of this paper are summarized below:
• Implicit negatives. We incorporated implicit nega-
tive signal (in terms of skipped, non-clicked ads) into
the training procedure, leading to higher quality broad
matches compared to training with random negatives;
• Dwell time weights.
We integrated dwell time
(i.e., time spent on the advertiser’s page following an
ad click) into the training procedure, allowing us to
weight short and long clicks diﬀerently, according to a
strength of the interest signal;
• Large-scale training.
To address the scalability
problems due to training data size and the need for
large vocabulary (amounting to hundreds of millions
of unique queries and ads), we proposed a novel dis-
tributed algorithm for training embeddings using pa-
rameter server framework that results in 10x training
time speedup and over 5x bigger vocabulary compared
to single machine training described in [25];
• Cold-start ad embeddings. We solved an impor-
tant problem of computing embeddings for ads that
were not observed in training, such that newly booked
ads can be instantly matched to user queries;
• Cold-start query embeddings. We proposed a pro-
cedure for calculating high-quality embeddings for new
and tail queries using embeddings of head queries;
• Experiments on real search traﬃc. We provide in-
sights on how diﬀerent state-of-the-art algorithms per-
form when applied to actual search traﬃc;
• Open-source vectors. As part of this work we open-
sourced a portion of query embeddings for research
purposes.
We trained a search embedding model using more than 9
billion search sessions, resulting in ad and query represen-
tations of very high quality. Extensive evaluation on real-
world search traﬃc showed that the proposed approach sig-
niﬁcantly outperformed the existing state-of-the-art broad
match methods on a number of critical performance mea-
sures, including relevance, reach, and click-through rate
(CTR).
2.
RELATED WORK
In the following we introduce related work on advanced
query-ad matching in sponsored search, and recent advances
in neural language models and distributed embeddings.
2.1
Neural language models
It has been shown that a number of problems in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) domain can be eﬀectively solved
by deﬁning a probability distribution over word sequences,
shown to perform well in chunking, parsing, or sentiment
analysis, to name a few. For this reason researchers have
proposed a number of methods called language models to
mathematically represent generation of language, aimed to
capture statistical characteristics of written language [1, 22].
Classic methods for language modeling represented words as
high-dimensional, sparse vectors using one-hot representa-
tion. Using this approach word vectors have dimensionality
equal to the size of the entire vocabulary, with zero val-
ues everywhere except for the element corresponding to the
given word. However, the approach often gives suboptimal
results due to sparsity issues and curse of dimensionality.
In order to mitigate the problems with word represen-
tations in high-dimensional spaces, neural language models
have been introduced.
Unlike classical approaches, these
methods learn distributed, low-dimensional representations
of words through the use of neural networks [2, 8, 28]. The
networks are trained by directly taking into account the
word order and their co-occurrence, based on the assumption
that words frequently appearing together in the sentences
also share more statistical dependence.
Despite their eﬀectiveness, training a large number of pa-
rameters of neural network-based approaches has been a se-
rious obstacle to wider use of the neural models. In particu-
lar, a single parameter update requires iteration over the en-
tire vocabulary, which can grow prohibitively large for many
practical applications. However, with the recent advances in
the NLP domain, and in particular with the development of
highly scalable continuous bag-of-words (CBOW) and skip-
gram (SG) language models for word representation learning
[25], the models have been shown to obtain state-of-the-art
performance on many traditional language tasks after train-
ing on large-scale textual data sets.
2.2
Broad match in sponsored search
Broad match is a well established, often used approach in
sponsored search advertising, responsible for billions of dol-
lars of search engine revenue. In addition to exact and vari-
ant match, which typically have the highest click-through
rates, many advertisers use broad match to increase the
reach to relevant queries that were not explicitly provided,
entrusting search engines with this task.
Most of the existing broad match techniques rely on query
rewriting to rewrite an unmatched user query to several
similar queries, in expectation that one of the rewrites will
match an advertiser-provided bid term, resulting in retrieval
of ads that bidded on that term. A basic query rewriting
approach involves representing queries as bag-of-words us-
ing tf-idf weighting, and calculating similarity between the
query and all other queries in order to ﬁnd good rewrite can-
didates. However, the bag-of-words representation of queries
is extremely sparse, which makes it impossible to ﬁnd re-
lated queries that do not share common words. Moreover,
it can lead to false positives when queries share common
words that have diﬀerent meanings in diﬀerent contexts, e.g.
“house music” and “house prices”. To mitigate these issues
some researchers proposed to enrich query representation
using text from web search results [7]. Others proposed to
extend query rewriting beyond string matching by applying
graph-based methods, such as Query Flow Graph (QFG)
[4], where similar queries are found by a random walk over a
bipartite graph of queries and link clicks [11], or neural net-
works [15], where query feature representations are learned
from web search data. However, none of these methods can
overcome an inherent limitation of the query rewriting ap-
proach. More speciﬁcally, once the query is rewritten it can
only be matched to ads that have the resulting rewrites as
bid terms, potentially overlooking other relevant ads.
Alternative methods aim to address this issue by directly
retrieving ads by calculating similarity between bag-of-words
representation of queries and bag-of-words representation of
ads obtained from ad title and description.
Even though
it reduces sparsity, this approach does not completely solve
the vocabulary mismatch problem [26] and may even intro-
duce additional issues, especially in the case of templated
ad creatives where majority of phrases in titles and descrip-
tions have little to do with the advertised product (e.g., “free
shipping”, “best prices”, “buy now”).
Finally, to rank the ads by relevance (e.g., in the case too
many ads are retrieved via query rewriting), it is common to
apply the learning-to-rank approach [16] that learns weights
for query and ad features based on editorially-labeled train-
ing set. These methods typically require enormous amounts
of accurate editorial grades for (query, ad) matches that are
often very expensive to obtain.
In this paper we go beyond query rewriting and super-
vised learning-to-rank, and propose to learn query and ad
embeddings from search data in an unsupervised manner,
followed by directly matching and ranking ads for queries
based on the distances in the learned embedding space.
3.
METHODOLOGY
To address the shortcomings of existing broad match al-
gorithms in sponsored search, we propose to take a new
approach to this task, motivated by the recent success of
distributed language models in NLP applications [25, 28].
In the context of NLP, distributed models are able to learn
word representations in a low-dimensional continuous vector
space using a surrounding context of the word in a sentence,
where in the resulting embedding space semantically similar
words are close to each other [25]. Our objective is to take
advantage of this property for the task of query-ad match-
ing in sponsored search, and to learn query and ad repre-
sentations in a low-dimensional space where queries would
be close to related ads. This would allow direct matching of
queries to ads, instead of taking the longer route of query
rewriting. Clearly, such approach reduces the complex broad
match task to a trivial K-nearest-neighbor (K-nn) search
between queries and ads in the joint embedding space.
Finding distributed query and ad representation, as op-
posed to ﬁnding word representations, brings very unique
challenges.
For example, while the basic unit for learn-
ing word representations is a sentence s = (w1, . . . , wM)
consisting on M words wm, m = 1, . . . , M, in our pro-
posed approach the basic unit for learning query and ad
representations are user actions within a search session
s = (a1, . . . , aM), where in the simplest case an action can
be a search query or an ad click. Moreover, search sessions
have a number of additional contexts that can be used to im-
prove quality of the ﬁnal model. For instance, search sessions
typically contain link clicks. Even though we are only inter-
ested in query and ad embeddings, link clicks can provide
additional context. In essence, the query and ad embeddings
will be aﬀected by the co-click behavior between queries and
search link clicks, resulting in an improved model. In addi-
tion, ad dwell time can be leveraged to distinguish between
good ad clicks and unsatisfactory or accidental clicks [21],
and can provide useful context for training better quality
embeddings. Finally, ads that are skipped in favor of a click
on a lower positioned ad can be used as implicit negative sig-
nal and serve as negative context during training to improve
the resulting model.
To formalize the training procedure, let us assume we are
given a set S of S search sessions obtained from N users,
where each session s = (a1, . . . , aM) ∈S is deﬁned as an un-
interrupted sequence of M user actions comprising queries,
ad clicks, and link clicks. A new session is initiated when-
ever there is a time gap of more than 30 minutes between
two consecutive user actions [12].
Then, the learning ob-
jective is to ﬁnd D-dimensional real-valued representation
vam ∈RD of each unique user action am.
The proposed search embedding model (called search2vec)
learns user search action representations using the skip-gram
model [25] by maximizing the objective function L over the
entire set S of search sessions, deﬁned as follows,
L =
X
s∈S
X
am∈s
X
−b≤i≤b,i̸=0
log P(am+i|am).
(3.1)
Probability P(am+i|am) of observing a neighboring user ac-
tion am+i given the current action am is deﬁned using the
soft-max function,
P(am+i|am) =
exp(v⊤
amv′
am+i)
P|V|
a=1 exp(v⊤
amv′a)
,
(3.2)
where va and v′
a are the input and output vector represen-
tations of user action a, hyperparameter b is deﬁned as a
length of the relevant context for action sequences, and V is
a vocabulary deﬁned as a set of unique actions in the data
set comprising queries, ads, and links. From (3.1) and (3.2)
we see that search2vec models temporal context of action se-
quences, where actions with similar contexts (i.e., with sim-
ilar neighboring actions) will have similar representations.
Time required to compute gradient ∇L of the objective
function in (3.1) is proportional to the vocabulary size,
which may be computationally infeasible in practical tasks
as |V| could easily reach hundreds of millions. As an alter-
native we used negative sampling approach proposed in [25],
which signiﬁcantly reduces computational complexity. Neg-
ative sampling can be formulated as follows. We generate a
set Dp of pairs (a, c) of user actions a and their contexts c
(i.e., actions within a window of length b that either precede
or follow action a), and a set Dn of negative pairs (a, c) of
user actions and n randomly sampled actions from the entire
vocabulary. The optimization objective then becomes,
argmax
θ
X
(a,c)∈Dp
log
1
1 + e−v′cva +
X
(a,c)∈Dn
log
1
1 + ev′cva ,
(3.3)
where parameters θ to be learned are va and v′
c, a, c ∈V.
The optimization is done via stochastic gradient ascent.
Visual representation of the search2vec model is presented
in Figure 1.
As discussed previously, and as depicted in
Figure 1, we propose to utilize additional context speciﬁc
to sponsored search domain, namely implicit negatives and
dwell-time. In the experimental section we explore this ap-
proach and empirically evaluate their beneﬁts in detail.
Leveraging ad dwell time. Let us assume that a user
performed a search query q1, followed by an ad click ad1. We
deﬁne ad dwell time as the time that the user spent on the ad
landing page. When the user stayed longer on the ad land-
ing page, it is usually interpreted as a positive engagement
signal, as opposed to the user immediately bouncing back
from the advertiser’s website. There also exists a notion of
accidental ad clicks with dwell time of only a few seconds,
which is especially apparent on mobile phone devices. To
incorporate this signal into our learning framework we pro-
pose to weight query-ad pairs with higher dwell times more,
while penalizing shorter dwell times.
More speciﬁcally, when optimizing the objective function
in (3.3), we introduce an additional weight ηt = log(1 + t)
for each element of the ﬁrst sum, where t denotes the dwell
ai-­‐2	  
ai	  
ai+2	  
Projec(on	  
i-­‐th	  user	  ac(on	  
ad	  click	  
ai-­‐1	  
link	  click	  
query	  
query	  
query	  
ai+1	  
ad	  view	  
dwell	  (me	  
ai+3	  
+	  
_	  
Figure 1: search2vec: dwell-time implicit negative skip-gram
time in minutes. For dwell times above 10 minutes we set
ηt = 1. Moreover, we use this approach to compute weight
only when updating the ad vector with the immediately pre-
ceding query and when updating the query vector with the
immediately succeeding ad, otherwise we set ηt = 1.
Leveraging implicit negative signals. Unlike in the
NLP domain, in the domain of sponsored search there does
exist an implicit negative signal in a form of ads that the
user decided to skip in favor of a click on a lower positioned
ad, which can be utilized during training.
In particular,
given an issued user query q1, let us assume that after the
GSP auction a total of k ads, ad1, ad2, . . . , adk, were shown
at diﬀerent positions on the page, with ad1 being shown at
the top position in the page followed by the remaining k −1
ads below. Note that the top position has the highest value
to the advertisers, as it has been shown to have the highest
probability of being clicked, especially on mobile devices due
to limited screen sizes. We adopt an assumption that if the
user scrolls down the page and clicks on a lower positioned
ad, all the ads ranked higher were of no interest to him and
can be treated as negative signal for query q1. We consider
implicit negatives only on top k = 3 positioned ads, and
only in cases where user had a single ad click in the session
with dwell time of over 10 seconds.
We formulate the use of implicit negatives in the following
way. In addition to sets Dp and Dn, we generate a set Din
of pairs (q, ad) of user queries q and the ads ad at higher
positions which were shown to the user, and skipped over in
favor of a click on ad at one of the lower positions. The new
optimization objective then becomes as follows,
argmax
θ
X
(a,c)∈Dp
log
1
1 + e−v′cva +
X
(a,c)∈Dn
log
1
1 + ev′cva
+
X
(q,ad)∈Din
log
1
1 + ev′
advq ,
(3.4)
where parameters θ to be learned remain the same as before.
Inference. Given learned query and ad embeddings, ad
retrieval for a given query q is performed by calculating co-
sine similarity between its vector vq and all ad vectors vad
in the vocabulary. The K ads with the highest similarity are
retrieved as broad matches. For large vocabularies, eﬃcient
K-nn search can be done via locality-sensitive hashing [13].
3.1
Scalable training algorithm
To realize the full potential of the proposed approach, we
found it necessary to train embeddings for several hundred
million of actions (i.e., words in the “vocabulary”), which in-
clude queries, ads, and links comprising the search session
data. Existing implementations for training word embed-
dings were found to fall short for our vocabulary size target,
as they require that all of the input and output vectors ﬁt in
the memory of a single machine. For example, a vocabulary
of 200 million words with 300-dimensional vectors requires
480GB of RAM memory, which is beyond the capacity of
typical machines. To address this issue, we developed a novel
distributed word embedding training algorithm based on a
variation of the parameter server paradigm.
A parameter server (PS)
[9] is a high-performance, dis-
tributed, in-memory key-value store specialized for machine
learning applications, typically used to store latest values of
model parameters throughout the course of training. A PS-
based training system includes a number of PS shards that
store model parameters and a number of clients that read
diﬀerent portions of the training data from a distributed ﬁle
system (e.g., Hadoop Distributed File System).
In the conventional PS system, the word embedding train-
ing can be implemented as follows. Each PS shard stores
input and output vectors for a portion of the words from
the vocabulary. Each client reads a subset of training data
in minibatches (e.g., 200 lines at a time), and after each
minibatch performs the vector updates of words found in
the minibatch and randomly sampled negative words. The
updates are achieved by transmitting the IDs of the words
to all the PS shards, which will, as a result, send back the
corresponding vectors to the client.
The client calculates
the gradient descent updates with respect to the minibatch
restriction of the objective (3.3) and transmits them to the
PS shards where the actual updates happen.
However, due to transmission costs of the actual word vec-
tors over the network, the conventional PS-based implemen-
tation of word embedding training requires too much net-
work bandwidth to achieve acceptable training throughput.
For this reason we propose a diﬀerent distributed system
architecture that requires signiﬁcantly less network band-
width. The proposed algorithm, illustrated in Figure 2, fea-
tures the following contributions with respect to the conven-
tional PS-based training approach:
• Column-wise partitioning of vectors among PS shards;
• No transmission of word vectors across the network;
• PS shard-side negative sampling and computation of
partial vector dot products.
In our algorithm, each PS shard stores distinct portion of
vector dimensions for all words from the vocabulary V, as op-
posed to previously described word-wise partitioning where
each PS shard stores entire vectors for a subset of words.
For example, assuming a vector dimension d = 300 and 10
PS shards, shard s ∈{0, . . . , 9} would store 30 dimensions
of input vectors v(w) and output vectors v′(w) with indices
i in the range 30s ≤i < 30s + 30 for all vocabulary words.
Since each PS shard now stores the entire vocabulary (i.e.,
diﬀerent vector dimensions of all words), we can implement
the random sampling step and the dot product calculation
step to the PS shards themselves. In this way we avoid trans-
mission costs of the actual vectors. Each client still processes
Clients: 
PS Shards: 
w1 
w2 
… 
wn 
 
Distributed File System 
. . . 
d1   …   d30             d31  …  d60
     d291 … d300 
Figure 2: Scalable word2vec on Hadoop
data in minibatches, and sends to the PS shards the indices
of (word, context) pairs that need to be updated. In addi-
tion, the client broadcasts common random number genera-
tor seeds, such that all shards can sample the same negative
context words. Each PS shard then calculates the partial
dot products with respect to their local dimensions for each
of the positive and negative (word, context) pairs and sends
the result to a client that made the request. Finally, the
client aggregates local dot products it received from all PS
shards and calculates the global coeﬃcient needed for gra-
dient updates. The single client’s minibatch step ends by
sending the global coeﬃcients to all PS shards, where input
and output vectors are updated correspondingly, without
any locking or synchronization mechanism.
In a typical at-scale run of the algorithm, the above pro-
cess is carried out by multiple client threads running on
each of a few hundred cluster nodes, all interacting with
the PS shards in parallel. The dataset is iterated over mul-
tiple times, and after each iteration the learning rate α is
reduced. The distributed implementation handles implicit
negatives in the same manner as positive contexts only with
negative multiplier in the gradient update, and can handle
dwell-time weights seamlessly.
In comparison to [25], our
system was found to be up to 10x faster depending on the
load on the shared cluster, training set, and vocabulary size.
3.2
Cold start ad embeddings
Contrary to everyday language where new words come
into existence occasionally, in ad serving business new ads
are introduced to the system every day. Matching service
is required to ﬁnd good query candidates for these new ads
even before they are shown to users.
In this section we
propose a method that addresses this problem by producing
cold start ad embeddings of good quality, which are then
used to ﬁnd relevant queries for that ad.
Given a newly booked ad, in absence of ad clicks that
could be used to learn a context vector, we must rely on
its textual content, including the bid term, ad title, and
description. In particular, in the process of learning query
context vectors Vq we learned embeddings for a large number
of words and phrases, many of which appear in ad titles and
descriptions.
In addition, the bid term context vector is
likely to be available (in 80% of cases by our evaluation).
The bid term context vector itself could be a good choice
for the cold start ad embedding. However, even though the
bid term should summarize the message being conveyed in
the ad, oftentimes advertisers bid on general terms, such as
“shoes”, “ﬁtness”, or “sports”, to maximize their traﬃc po-
Data: ad title, ad description, ad URL, bid term b,
threshold τc, set of context query vectors V q
Initialization: τc = 0.45, get bid term vector vb from
Vq, set vad = vb, create ad document dad from all
n-grams (n = 1, .., 10) in ad title, description, URL;
forall the phrases p in ad document dad do
if vp exists in Vq then
if sim(vb,vp)> τ then
vad = vad + vp;
end
end
end
Result: ad content vector vad
Algorithm 1: content search2vec
tential. Evidently, one could ﬁnd additional useful phrases
in the ad title and description, whose vectors, in combina-
tion with the bid term vector, could produce an embedding
that is closer to more speciﬁc query matches for that ad.
To compute a content-based ad vector we propose to ex-
tract relevant words and phrases from ad content and com-
pute the linear combination of their context vectors,
vad =
X
t=1:Ta
vpt,
(3.5)
where Ta is the number of extracted words and phrases with
vectors vpt in Vq. The resulting ad vector is of the same
dimensionality and in the same feature space as the query
context vectors. Consequently, the same retrieval procedure
as the one used for context ad vectors can be used to ﬁnd
relevant broad match queries for the cold-start ads.
The most challenging part of this procedure is extracting
relevant words and phrases from the textual ad informa-
tion. For example, let us consider an ad with title “Visit
Metropolitan Opera House in New York” and bid term “per-
forming arts”. While phrases “opera house” and “metropoli-
tan opera house” are relevant in the context of this ad, other
phrases such as “visit”, “house”, or “house in new york” do
not carry any useful information or have completely diﬀerent
meaning from what is communicated in the ad. For example,
phrase“visit”is too general and“house in new york”refers to
real-estate in New York with no connections to performing
arts. In addition, ads often contain generic phrases such as
“free shipping”, “buy now”, “30% oﬀ”, and “best deals on”,
which if used in the ﬁnal sum (3.5) may cause the result-
ing vector to diverge from relevant queries in the embedding
space, leading to poor broad matches.
To decide which n-grams should be formed from words in
short text, a typical approach is to use a CRF segmentation
model [20]. However, CRF models have their limitations: 1)
they require a large training set with human-annotated ex-
amples of correct text segmentations, which needs to be con-
stantly updated to account for new entities; 2) they cannot
automatically detect phrases that should not be considered
and would require creating a blacklist of terms that should
be excluded from (3.5). Similar shortcomings are present in
the paragraph2vec model [23] that suggests simply using all
words in a document to learn its embedding.
To this end we propose an anchor phrases model, sum-
marized in Algorithm 1, that uses search context vectors to
automatically ﬁlter out stopwords and non-relevant phrases
and keep only the ones closely related to the anchor. The
choice of the anchor falls on the advertiser-deﬁned bid term,
as that is the one phrase we know is related to the ad. In rare
cases when anchor context vector is not available, one can
be constructed as described in Section 3.3. The algorithm
uses context vectors of queries learned from search sessions.
It initializes the content ad vector to the context vector of
the bid term. Next, it creates a textual ad document from
all possible n-gram phrases contained in the ad title, de-
scription, and URL. Finally, it considers all phrases from
the ad document for which a context vector exists and has a
high enough cosine similarity to the bid term vector (above
threshold τc). These relevant phrases are then added to the
ad vector to further focus its representation. The resulting
ad vector lies in the same embedding space as the search
queries. Therefore, relevant broad match query candidates
can be found via K-nearest neighbor search. We refer to
this method as content search2vec.
3.3
Cold start query embeddings
Quality of the query embedding is contingent on the num-
ber of times it was observed in the training data. Therefore,
even though our scalable training procedure allows us to
train vectors for several hundred millions of queries, we are
still limited by the frequency of queries in search sessions.
Following the procedure from [25] we train context vectors
for queries that occur at least 10 times. Considering that
frequency of queries in search logs follows a power low dis-
tribution [27], a large number of queries will not meet this
frequency requirement. They are referred to as tail queries,
as opposed to head and torso queries that occupy the por-
tion of the power law curve for which a context vector can be
learned. While individually rare, tail queries make up a sig-
niﬁcant portion of the query volume. For this reason, these
queries have signiﬁcant potential for advertising revenue.
Most major search engines pre-compute broad matches for
a large number of head and torso queries. This table Tb is
then cached for fast access and retrieval. The nonexistence
or lack of presence in search sessions makes tail queries much
harder to match against ads [6], as they lack useful contexts
of surrounding web activities to help in matching. Match-
ing them to ads solely based on textual information results
in matches of low quality, primarily due to the so-called
vocabulary mismatch problem [26].
Finally, short text in
queries introduces limitations into producing query embed-
dings based on their content.
To address this problem we propose to expand the head
queries from table Tb with K nearest neighbor queries in the
learned embedding space and build an inverted index to be
used for eﬃcient matching against tail queries. In the online
phase, when a new user query arrives that has no matched
ads we use the inverted index to map the query into related
previously-seen queries that have ads associated with them.
Finally, the user query inherits ads of the top matched query.
To illustrate the matching procedure, in Table 2 we show ex-
amples of tail queries and top matched queries, obtained via
inverted index. Bolded words are the ones matched against
the user query. We refer to this method as elastic search2vec.
Previous attempts at building an inverted index of head
queries for dealing with tail queries were based on features
extracted directly from words of the head query [6] or from
words of queries that co-occurred in the same sessions as
the head query [5], such as typos and reformulations. While
words from query are good representations of its syntax,
they fail to accurately represent its semantics. On the other
Table 2: Demonstration of elasting search2vec
User search query (not present in Vq)
Matched query-document
Query-document features (K-nn queries)
metropolitan opera house, ny opera
metropolitan opera house that is in new york city
metropolitan opera house
new york opera, new york opera house
metropolitan opera, nyc opera house
best ﬂight tickets to paris, cheap ﬂights to paris
best ﬂight deals that travel to paris france
best ﬂight tickets to paris
cheap tickets to paris, best ﬂight fares to paris
cheap airfare paris france, travel to paris france
best stock ticker apps, stock tracker app in appstore
what is the best stock ticker trading app in appstore
best stock ticker apps
best stock apps in appstore, stock ticker apps
best trading apps, real time stocks on the app store
hand, words from co-occurring queries may not be the best
choice as semantically similar queries often have similar con-
texts (e.g., same link and ad clicks), but do not necessarily
appear in the same session. For this reason, we build the
inverted index by considering words of semantically simi-
lar queries obtained by K-nn search in the embedding space
Vq. As our experiments conﬁrm, this leads to more accurate
cold-start query embeddings and better quality ad matches.
4.
EXPERIMENTS
In this section we describe the training data set and give
empirical evaluation of the proposed search2vec method.
The performance was evaluated in terms of relevance on edi-
torially judged set of (query, ad) pairs, as well as in terms of
click-through rates from a live bucket tests on Yahoo Search
traﬃc. We compared several variations of our method dis-
cussed in the previous sections, as well as a number of base-
line approaches. Finally, we conducted experiments to eval-
uate the proposed models for cold-start ad and query em-
beddings that address the limitations of the context models
by allowing us to produce matches for new queries and ads.
Search2vec training. In order to learn query and ad em-
beddings we organized our search data into sessions, or unin-
terrupted sequences of user’s web search activities: queries,
ad clicks, and search link clicks. Each ad impression was
uniquely identiﬁed by its creative ID and bid term ID. Search
sessions that contained only 1 user action were discarded.
We discarded from the vocabulary all activities that oc-
curred less than 10 times in the search sessions. The most
frequent actions were downsampled with threshold of 10−5
as in [25]. The dimensionality of the embedding space was
set to d = 300, the window size was set to 5 and the number
or random negative samples per vector update was set to 5.
We learned embeddings for more than 126.2 million
unique queries, 42.9 million unique ads, and 131.7 million
unique links, using one of the largest search data set reported
so far, comprising over 9.1 billion search sessions collected on
Yahoo Search. End-to-end search2vec training via parame-
ter server using 10 iteration over the data set takes about
30 hours to complete. In comparison, multi-threaded sin-
gle machine implementation [25] on 256GB RAM box with
24 threads and same training parameters takes more than a
week to complete and can train only up to 80 million vectors.
4.1
Broad match models
1) word2vec model uses publicly available word vectors3
trained on Google News data set. Query vectors were gen-
erated by summing vectors of word tokens within a query,
and ad vectors were generated by summing vectors of word
3https://code.google.com/p/word2vec, accessed Jan. 2016
Editorial Grade
Bad
Fair
Good
Excellent
Perfect
search2vec model score
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Figure 3: Box plot of editorial grades vs. search2vec scores
tokens from title, description, bid term, and display URL.
English stopwords were not considered in the summation.
2) TF-IDF model generates broad match candidates by
computing the cosine similarity between bag-of-words repre-
sentation of queries and ads (constructed from ad title, de-
scription, bid term, and display URL, excluding stopwords).
3) QFG model was trained using a click-ﬂow graph con-
structed from search sessions data set S.
Broad matches
were produced by query rewriting of the ad bid term.
4) search2vec model was trained using search sessions
data set S composing of search queries, ads and links. Broad
match candidates for a query were generated by calculating
cosine similarity between the query vector and all ad vectors.
5) search2vecdwell,in is a variation of search2vec method
with dwell time weights, and implicit negatives added to the
training data. We combined dwell time and implicit negative
enhancements under one framework as both of them aim at
reducing the eﬀect of bad clicks.
6) content search2vec is tailored for the cold-start case
(i.e.
ads that do not appear in search sessions).
Broad
match candidates are found by calculating cosine similarity
between the context query vector the content ad vectors.
7) elastic search2vec aims at ﬁnding ads for tail queries
by matching against an inverted index of context queries
that already have ad matches.
Our evaluation did not include topic models such as LDA
[3] or PLSA [17], as a number of researchers [18] found that
they obtain suboptimal performance on short texts.
4.2
Ofﬂine relevance results
In the ﬁrst set of experiments we used editorial judg-
ments of query-ad pairs to compare broad match methods
in terms of relevance. For this purpose we used an in-house
K
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
NDCG
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
sch2vecdwell,in
sch2vec
QFG
content sch2vec
elastic sch2vec
word2vec
TFIDF
Figure 4: NDCG@K for diﬀerent models
Table 3: Comparison of diﬀerent methods on editorial data
Method
oAUC Macro NDCG
word2vec
0.6573
0.7308
TF-IDF
0.6407
0.6983
QFG
0.6928
0.7848
search2vec
0.7254
0.8303
search2vecdwell,in 0.7392
0.8569
content search2vec
0.6881
0.7758
elastic search2vec
0.6805
0.7612
dataset consisting of a query-ad pairs that were graded ed-
itorially. The editors were instructed to grade more than
24,000 query-ad pairs as either Bad, Fair, Good, Excellent,
or Perfect match. For each ad, the editors had access to bid
term, ad title, description, and display URL to help them
reach their judgment.
Note that the candidate query-ad
pairs were not generated by any of the tested methods. For
each query there were up to 9 judged ads, allowing us to
evaluate ranking of ads in addition to relevance.
Using each of the compared methods we generated query
features and ad features for each judged pair. Then, to cal-
culate score for a particular pair, we calculated cosine sim-
ilarity between the query vector and the ad vector. In case
of QFG query rewriting model, the query-ad relevance score
was calculated between the query and the ad bid term. In
case of elastic search2vec model, query vector was obtained
by inverse index search that excluded the searched query and
calculating the cosine similarity of the top retrieved context
query vector and the ad context vector.
There are several questions one could ask regarding al-
gorithm relevance. First, how well can the algorithm score
distinguish between good and bad query-ad pairs. Second,
how well can the ads be ranked based on the algorithm score,
and how much does this ranking deviate from ranking based
on editorial grades. For this purpose we concentrated on the
following two metrics to measure relevance:
1) oAUC Ordinal AUC measures how well the cosine
similarity scores computed by the trained model can dis-
criminate between editorial grades, by computing the av-
erage AUC (area under ROC curve) across four classiﬁers:
perfect-and-above vs. below-perfect, excellent-and-above vs.
below excellent, good-and-above vs. below good, and lastly
fair-and-above vs. below fair.
2) Macro NDCG measures how well the ranked scores
align with the ranked editorial grades.
Given numerical
grades (1 for Bad, 2 for Fair, 3 for Good, 4 for Excellent
and 5 for Perfect) we used (2grade −1) as NDCG labels and
position discounting of log(position in ranked list). Finally,
we average the metric across all queries. Unlike oAUC, this
performance measure incurs a greater penalty for mistakes
found at the top of the list.
In Table 3 we report the averaged oAUC and Macro
NDCG of editorial query-ad pairs for diﬀerent methods. In
addition, to get a sense of how diﬀerent models compare at
a particular rank we show the NDCG metric at values of
rank ranging from 2 to 9 in Figure 4.
Several conclusions can be drawn. First, we can see that
the models that did not utilize search sessions (i.e., word2vec
and TF-IDF) perform worse than the models that use his-
torical search logs (i.e., QFG and search2vec).
Second,
search2vec embedding method performs better than QFG
graph method. This can be explained by the fact that QFG
only makes use of the co-occurrence of user actions in search
sessions, while search2vec also accounts for similarity of their
contexts. Third, introduction of dwell time and implicit neg-
atives improves relevance over baseline search2vec model.
Interestingly, the increase in oAUC of search2vecdwell,in
over search2vec was not as large as the improvement in
Macro NDCG. This higher improvement in ranking measure
can be explained by the fact that search2vecdwell,in leverages
ad views in addition to ad clicks. Therefore, if two ads have
the same number of clicks but one of them was viewed an
order of magnitude more frequently, search2vecdwell,in will
rank it lower than the ad which was shown less times, thus
obtaining a better result. Finally, relevance based on cold-
start query and ad embeddings produces reasonable results,
indicating that they can be successfully used until context
vectors can be learned from sessions.
To better characterize the search2vec method, in Figure 3
we show a box plot of cosine similarities between editorially
judged queries and ads for search2vecdwell,in model, grouped
by diﬀerent editorial grades.
We can see that the cosine
similarity scores correlate well with the editorial judgments,
indicating a strong potential of the learned embeddings for
the task of retrieval of high-quality query-ad pairs.
4.3
Online test results
Following successful oﬄine evaluation of the proposed
broad match methods, in the second set of experiments we
conducted tests on live Yahoo Search traﬃc.
Five buck-
ets with ﬁve diﬀerent broad match techniques were set
up (QFG, search2vec, search2vecdwell,in, content search2vec
and elastic search2vec), all on 5% of overall search traﬃc and
compared against control bucket, which employed a broad
match model currently used in production. Note that, al-
though the buckets used diﬀerent broad match techniques,
all of them still included the same exact match and variant
match techniques. The online test was run for 7 days, and
was performed on a subset of active sponsored search ads.
Diﬀerent search2vec methods produced broad matches by
ﬁnding K = 30 nearest ads in the embedding space for each
search query from our 126.2M vocabulary, and keeping only
ads with cosine similarity above τ = 0.65. The threshold was
chosen based on editorial results from Figure 3, where it can
be observed that threshold of 0.65 captures most Good, Ex-
cellent, and Perfect query-ad pairs while discarding most of
Table 4: Comparison of broad match methods in A/B test
Method
CTR
Coverage
QFG
-
-
elastic search2vec
−4.81%
+43.79%
content search2vec
−1.24%
+35.61%
search2vec
+6.21%
+26.44%
search2vecdwell,in +10.64%
+19.95%
Table 5: Comparison of ad cold-start methods
Method
Average
STD
bid term vector
0.731
0.128
words
0.574
0.059
anchor words
0.688
0.077
phrases
0.665
0.067
CRF phrases
0.604
0.075
anchor phrases
0.792
0.077
Fair and Bad ones. While search2vec and search2vecdwell,in
were restricted to only ads for which we previously observed
clicks in historical search logs, content search2vec generated
embeddings for all active ads, and it is expected to have
higher ad coverage. In the case of QFG method, the retrieval
was done via query rewriting. For each query we determined
the most relevant bid terms, and retrieved all ad creatives
with that bid term, up to K = 30 ads per query.
The results of the test in terms of CTR and coverage are
summarized in Table 4. For CTR we measured the number
of clicks on particular broad match ads, divided by the total
number of shown ads by that broad match model. Then, for
each 