Self-supervised Learning for Large-scale Item Recommendations
Tiansheng Yao, Xinyang Yi, Derek Zhiyuan Cheng, Felix Yu, Ting Chen, Aditya Menon
Lichan Hong, Ed H. Chi, Steve Tjoa, Jieqi (Jay) Kang, Evan Ettinger
Google Inc., United States
ABSTRACT
Large scale recommender models find most relevant items from
huge catalogs, and they play a critical role in modern search and rec-
ommendation systems. To model the input space with large-vocab
categorical features, a typical recommender model learns a joint
embedding space through neural networks for both queries and
items from user feedback data. However, with millions to billions
of items in the corpus, users tend to provide feedback for a very
small set of them, causing a power-law distribution. This makes
the feedback data for long-tail items extremely sparse.
Inspired by the recent success in self-supervised representation
learning research in both computer vision and natural language un-
derstanding, we propose a multi-task self-supervised learning (SSL)
framework for large-scale item recommendations. The framework
is designed to tackle the label sparsity problem by learning better
latent relationship of item features. Specifically, SSL improves item
representation learning as well as serving as additional regulariza-
tion to improve generalization. Furthermore, we propose a novel
data augmentation method that utilizes feature correlations within
the proposed framework.
We evaluate our framework using two real-world datasets with
500M and 1B training examples respectively. Our results demon-
strate the effectiveness of SSL regularization and show its superior
performance over the state-of-the-art regularization techniques. We
also have already launched the proposed techniques to a web-scale
commercial app-to-app recommendation system, with significant
improvements top-tier business metrics demonstrated in A/B exper-
iments on live traffic. Our online results also verify our hypothesis
that our framework indeed improves model performance even more
on slices that lack supervision.
1
INTRODUCTION
Recently, neural-net models have emerged to the main stage of
modern recommendation systems throughout the industry (see, e.g.,
[18, 31, 39, 42]), and academia ([8, 32]). Compared to conventional
approaches like matrix factorization [1, 21, 22], gradient boosted
decision trees [4, 29], and logistic regression based recommenders
[19], these deep models handle categorical features more effectively.
They also enable more complex data representations, and introduce
more non-linearity to better fit the complex data for recommenders.
A particular recommendation task we focus on in this paper is
to identify the most relevant items given a query from a huge item
catalog. This general problem of large-scale item recommendations
has been widely adopted in various applications. Depending on the
type of the query, a recommendation task could be: (i) personal-
ized recommendation: when the query is a user; (ii) item to item
recommendation: when the query is also an item; and (iii) search:
when the query is a piece of free text. To model the interactions
between a query and an item, a well-known approach leverages
embedding-based neural networks. The recommendation task is typ-
ically formulated as an extreme classification problem [10] where
each item is represented as a dense vector in the output space.
This paper is focused on the two-tower DNNs (see Figure 1),
popular in many real-world recommenders (see e.g. [23, 39]). In this
architecture, a neural network encodes a set of item features into an
embedding thus making it applicable even for indexing cold-start
items. Moreover, the two-tower DNN architecture enables efficient
serving for a large corpus of items in real time, by converting the
top-k nearest neighbor search problem to Maximum-Inner-Product-
Search (MIPS) [9] that is solvable in sublinear complexity.
Embedding-based deep models typically have large amount of pa-
rameters because they are built with high-dimensional embeddings
that represent high cardinality sparse features such as topics or
item IDs. In many existing literature, the loss functions for training
these models are formulated as a supervised learning problem. The
supervision comes from the collected labels (e.g., clicks). Modern
recommendation systems collect billions to trillions of footprints
from users, providing huge amount of training data for building
deep models. However, when it comes to modeling a huge catalogue
of items in the order of millions (e.g., songs and apps [28]) to even
billions (e.g., videos on YouTube [10]), data could still be highly
sparse for certain slices due to:
• Highly-skewed data distribution: The interaction between
queries and items are often highly skewed in a power-law dis-
tribution [30]. So a small set of the popular items gets most of
the interactions. This will always leave the training data for
long-tail items very sparse.
• Lack of explicit user feedback: Users often provide lots of
positive feedback implicitly like clicks and thumb-ups. However,
they are much less likely to provide explicit feedback like item
ratings, feedback for user happiness, and relevance scores.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) offers a different angle to improve
deep representation learning via unlabeled data. The basic idea
is to enhance training data with various data augmentations, and
supervised tasks to predict or reconstitute the original examples as
auxiliary tasks. Self-supervised learning has been widely used in the
areas of Compute Vision (CV) [15, 25, 33] and Natural Language Un-
derstanding (NLU) [12, 24]. An example work [25] in CV proposed
to rotate images at random, and train a model to predict how each
augmented input image was rotated. In NLU, masked language task
was introduced in the BERT model, to help improve pre-training of
language models. Similarly, other pre-training tasks like predicting
surrounding sentences and linked sentences in Wikipedia articles
have also been used in improving dual-encoder type models in NLU
[3]. Compared to conventional supervised learning, self-supervised
learning provides complementary objectives eliminating the pre-
requisite of collecting labels manually. In addition, SSL enables
arXiv:2007.12865v4  [cs.LG]  25 Feb 2021
autonomous discovery of good semantic representations by exploit-
ing the internal relationship of input features.
Despite the wide adoption in computer vision and natural lan-
guage understanding, the application of self-supervised learning
in the field of recommendation systems is less well studied. The
closest line of research studies a set of regularization techniques
[17, 23, 41], which are designed to force learned representations
(i.e., output layer (embeddings) of a multi-layer perception), of dif-
ferent examples to be farther away from each other, and spread
out in the entire latent embedding space. Although sharing similar
spirit with SSL, these techniques do not explicitly construct SSL
tasks. In contrast to models in CV or NLU applications, recommen-
dation model takes extremely sparse input where high cardinality
categorical features are one-hot (or multi-hot) encoded, such as
the item IDs or item categories [31]. These features are typically
represented as learnable embedding vectors in deep models. As
most models in computer vision and NLU deal with dense input,
existing methods for creating SSL tasks are not directly applicable
to the sparse models in recommendation systems. More recently, a
line of research studies self-supervised learning improving sequen-
tial user modeling in recommendations [27, 37, 43]. Different from
these works, this paper focuses on item representation learning,
and shows how SSL can help improve generalization in the context
of long-tail item distribution. Moreover, in contrast to using SSL
on a certain sequential user feature, we design new SSL tasks and
demonstrate their effectiveness for learning with a set of hetero-
geneous categorical features, which we believe is a more general
setup for other types of recommendation models such as multitask
ranking models (e.g., [42]).
In this paper, we propose to leverage self-supervised learning
based auxiliary tasks to improve item representations, especially
with long-tail distributions and sparse data. Different from CV or
NLU applications, input space of recommendation model is highly
sparse and represented by a set of categorical features (e.g. item ids)
with large cardinality. For such sparse models, we propose a new
SSL framework, where the key idea is to: (i) augment data by mask-
ing input information; (ii) encode each pair of augmented examples
by a two-tower DNN; and (iii) apply a contrastive loss to learn rep-
resentations of augmented data. The goal of contrastive learning
is to let augmented data from the same example be discriminated
against others. Note that the two-tower DNN for contrastive learn-
ing and the one for encoding query and item can share a certain
amount of model parameters. See more details in Section 3.
Our contribution is four-fold:
• SSL framework: We present a model architecture agnostic
self-supervised learning framework for sparse neural models
in recommendations. The auxiliary self-supervised loss and the
primary supervised loss are jointly optimized via a multi-task
learning framework. We focus on using this framework for
efficiently scoring a large corpus of items, which is also known
as item retrieval in two-stage recommenders [10]. We believe
it would also shed light on designing SSL for other types of
models such as ranking models [7].
• Data augmentation: We propose a novel data augmentation
method that exploits feature correlations and are tailored for
feature embeddings
DNN
embedding
query features
feature embeddings
DNN
embedding
item features
supervised loss
Figure 1: Model architecture: Two-tower DNN with query
and item representations.
heterogeneous categorical features that are common in recom-
mender models.
• Offline experiments: On one public dataset and one industry
scale dataset for recommendation systems, we demonstrate that
introducing SSL as an auxiliary task can significantly improve
model performance, especially when labels are scarce. Com-
paring to the state-of-art non-SSL regularization techniques
[17, 23, 41], we demonstrate that SSL consistently performs
better, and improves model performance even when non-SSL
regularization does not bring any additional gains.
• Live experiment in a web-scale recommender: We have
launched the proposed SSL technique in a fairly strong two-
tower app-to-app recommendation model in a large-scale real-
world system. Live A/B testing shows significantly improved
top-tier metrics. We especially see bigger improvements for
slices without much supervision.
2
RELATED WORK
Self-supervised Learning and Pre-training. Various unsupervised
and self-supervised learning tasks have been studied in the com-
puter vision community. The closest line of research is SimCLR [5]
which also utilizes self-supervised learning and contrastive learning
for visual representation learning. Different with SimCLR and other
works [2, 6] in vision, here we propose augmentations that are more
suitable and tailed for categorical features for recommendations,
instead of relying on image-specific augmentations such as image
cropping, rotation and color distortion. In addition, the proposed
framework does not require multi-stage training schedules (such
as pre-training then fine-tuning). [20].
In NLU, for dual-encoder models, [3] shows that pre-training
tasks better aligned with the final task are more helpful than generic
tasks such as next sentence prediction and masked-LM. The pre-
training tasks are designed to leverage large-scale public NLU con-
tent, such as Wikipedia. In this paper, we also use the dual-encoder
model architecture. Different from the above, the proposed self-
supervision tasks do not require the use of a separate data source.
Spread-out Regularization. Zhang et al. [41] and Wu et al. [36]
use spread-out regularization for improving generalization of deep
models. Specifically, in [41], a regularization promoting separation
between random instances is shown to improve training stability
and generalization. In [36], one objective is to train a classifier
treating each instance as its own class, therefore promoting large
instance separations in the embedding space. Both the above ap-
proaches are studied for computer vision applications.
2
Neural Recommenders. Deep learning has led to many successes
in building industry-scale recommender systems such as video
suggestion [10], news recommendation [34], and visual discovery
in social networks [26, 40]. For large-scale item retrieval, two-tower
models with separate query and item towers are widely used due to
its high efficiency for serving. The recommendations are typically
computed by a dot-product between query and item embeddings
so that finding top-k items can be converted to MIPS problem [9]
with sublinear time complexity. One popular factorized structure is
softmax-based multi-class classification model. The work in [10]
treats the retrieval task as an extreme multi-class classification
trained with multi-layer perceptron (MLP) model using sampled
softmax as loss function. Such models leverages item ID as the
only item feature, suffering from cold-start issue. More recently, a
line of research [23, 39] considers applying two-tower DNNs on
retrieval problems, which is also known as dual-encoder [16, 38],
where item embeddings are constructed by a MLP from ID and
other categorical metadata features. The self-supervised approach
proposed is applicable to both ranking and retrieval models. In this
paper we focus on using SSL for retrieval models, particularly, on
improving item representations in two-tower DNNs.
Self-supervised Learning in Sequential Recommendations. In rec-
ommender systems, a line of research has been recently studied for
utilizing self-supervised learning for sequential recommendation.
Self-supervised learning tasks are designed to capture information
among user history [43] and learn more robust disentangled user
representation [27] in user sequential recommendation. Moreover,
Xin et al. shows combining SSL with reinforcement learning is
effective to capture long-term user interest in sequential recom-
mendation. Different from the above, our proposed SSL framework
is focusing on improving item representation with long-tail distri-
butions. The proposed SSL tasks do not require modeling sequential
information and are generally applicable to deep models with het-
erogeneous categorical features.
3
METHOD
We present our framework of self-supervised learning for deep
neural net models for recommenders using large-vocab categorical
features. Particularly, a general self-supervised learning framework
is introduced in Section 3.1. In Section 3.2, we present a data aug-
mentation method to construct SSL tasks and elaborates on their
connections to spread-out regularization. Finally, in Section 3.3,
we describe how to use SSL to improve factorized models (i.e.,
two-tower DNNs as shown in Figure 1), via a multi-task learning
framework.
3.1
Framework
Inspired by the SimCLR framework [5] for visual representation
learning, we adopt similar contrastive learning algorithms for learn-
ing representations of categorical features. The basic idea is two
folds: first, we apply different data augmentation for the same train-
ing example to learn representations; and then use contrastive loss
function to encourage the representations learned for the same
training example to be similar. Contrastive loss was also applied in
training two-tower DNNs (see e.g., [23, 39]), although the goal there
was to make positive item agree with its corresponding queries.
zi
h
xi
zj
xj
zi
(z  ,  )
i .
zj
yi
yj
yi
yj
h
Figure 2: Self-supervised learning framework illustration.
Two data augmentations ℎand 𝑔are applied to the input; En-
coders H and G are applied to the augmented examples y𝑖
and y′
𝑖to generate embeddings z𝑖and z′
𝑖. The SSL loss L𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓
w.r.t. z𝑖is optimized towards maximizing the similarity with
z′
𝑖while minimizing the similarity between z𝑗and z′
𝑗.
We consider a batch of 𝑁item examples 𝑥1, ...,𝑥𝑁, where 𝑥𝑖∈X
represents a set of features for example 𝑖. In the context of recom-
menders, an example indicates a query, an item or a query-item
pair. Suppose there are a pair of transform function ℎ,𝑔: X →X
that augment 𝑥𝑖to be 𝑦𝑖,𝑦′
𝑖respectively,
𝑦𝑖←ℎ(𝑥𝑖), 𝑦′
𝑖←𝑔(𝑥𝑖).
(1)
Given the same input of example 𝑖, we want to learn different
representations 𝑦𝑖,𝑦′
𝑖after augmentation to make sure the model
still recognizes that both 𝑦𝑖and 𝑦𝑖represent the same input 𝑖. In
other words, the contrastive loss learns to minimize the difference
between 𝑦𝑖,𝑦′
𝑖. In the mean time, for different example 𝑖and 𝑗,
the contrastive loss maximizes the difference between the repre-
sentations learned 𝑦𝑖,𝑦′
𝑗after data different augmentations. Let
z𝑖, z′
𝑖denote the embeddings of 𝑦𝑖,𝑦′
𝑖after encoded by two neural
networks H, G : X →R𝑑, that is
z𝑖←H (𝑦𝑖), z′
𝑖←G(𝑦′
𝑖).
(2)
We treat (z𝑖, z′
𝑖) as positive pairs, and (z𝑖, z′
𝑗) as negative pairs
for 𝑖≠𝑗. Let 𝑠(z𝑖, z′
𝑗) = ⟨z𝑖, z′
𝑗⟩/(∥z𝑖∥· ∥z′
𝑗∥). To encourage the
above properties, we define the SSL loss for a batch of 𝑁examples
{𝑥𝑖} as:
L𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓({𝑥𝑖}; H, G) := −1
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖∈[𝑁]
log
exp (𝑠(z𝑖, z′
𝑖)/𝜏)
Í
𝑗∈[𝑁] exp (𝑠(z𝑖, z′
𝑗)/𝜏) .
(3)
where 𝜏is a tunable hyper-parameter for the softmax temperature.
The above loss function learns a robust embedding space such that
similar items are close to each other after data augmentation, and
random examples are pushed farther away. The overall framework
is illustrated in Figure 2.
Encoder Architecture. For input examples with categorical fea-
tures, H, G are typically constructed with an input layer and a
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) on top. The input layer is often a con-
catenation of normalized dense features and multiple sparse feature
embeddings, where the sparse feature embeddings are learnt repre-
sentations stored in embedding tables (In contrast, the input layers
for computer vision and language models directly work on raw
inputs). In order to make SSL facilitate the supervised learning task,
we share the embedding table of sparse features for both neural
3
networks H, G. Depending on the technique for data augmentation
(ℎ,𝑔), the MLPs of H and G could also be fully or partially shared.
Connection with Spread-out Regularization [41]. In the special
case where (ℎ,𝑔) are identical map and H, G are the same neural
network, loss function in equation (3) is then reduced to
−𝑁−1 ∑︁
𝑖
log
𝑒𝑥𝑝(1/𝜏)
𝑒𝑥𝑝(1/𝜏) + Í
𝑗≠𝑖𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑠(z𝑖, z𝑗)/𝜏)
which encourages learned representations of different examples to
have small cosine similarity. The loss is similar to the spread-out reg-
ularization introduced in [41], except that the original proposal uses
square loss, i.e., 𝑁−1 Í
𝑖
Í
𝑗≠𝑖⟨z𝑖, z𝑗⟩2, instead of softmax. Spread-
out regularization has been proven to improve generalization of
large-scale retrieval models. In Section 4, we show that by intro-
ducing specific data augmentations, using SSL-based regularization
can further improve model performance compared to spread-out.
3.2
A Two-stage Data Augmentation
We introduce the data augmentation, i.e., ℎand 𝑔in Figure 2. Given
a set of item features, the key idea is to create two augmented exam-
ples by masking part of the information. A good transformation and
data augmentation should make minimal amount of assumptions
on the data such that it can be generally applicable to a large variety
of tasks and models. The idea of masking is inspired by the Masked
Language Modeling in BERT [12]. Different from sequential tokens,
a general set of features does not have sequential order, and leaves
the choice of masking pattern as an open question. We seek to
design the masking pattern by exploring feature correlation. We
propose Correlated Feature Masking (CFM), tailored to categorical
features with awareness of feature correlations.
Before diving into the details of masking, we first present a two-
stage augmentation algorithm. Note that without augmentation,
the input layer is created by concatenating the embeddings of all
categorical features. The two-stage augmentation includes:
• Masking. Apply a masking pattern on the set of item features.
We use a default embedding in the input layer to represent the
features that are masked.
• Dropout. For categorical features with multiple values, we drop
out each value with a certain probability. It further reduces input
information and increase the hardness of SSL task.
The masking step can be interpreted as a special case of dropout
with a 100% dropout rate. One strategy is the complementary mask-
ing pattern, that we split the feature set into two exclusive features
sets into the two augmented examples. Specifically, we could ran-
domly split the feature set into two disjoint subsets. We call this
method Random Feature Masking (RFM), and will use it as one
of our baselines. We now introduce Correlated Feature Masking
(CFM) where we further explore the feature correlations when
creating masking patterns.
Mutual Information of Categorical Features. If the set of masked
features are chosen at random, (ℎ,𝑔) are essentially sampled from
2𝑘different masking patterns over the whole feature set with 𝑘
features. Different masking patterns would naturally lead to dif-
ferent effects for the SSL task. For instance, the SSL contrastive
learning task may exploit the shortcut of highly correlated features
between the two augmented examples, making the SSL task too
easy. To address this issue, we propose to split features according
to feature correlation measured by mutual information. The mutual
information of two categorical features is given by
𝑀𝐼(𝑉𝑖,𝑉𝑗) =
∑︁
𝑣𝑖∈𝑉𝑖,𝑣𝑗∈𝑉𝑗
𝑃(𝑣𝑖, 𝑣𝑗) log 𝑃(𝑣𝑖, 𝑣𝑗)
𝑃(𝑣𝑖)𝑃(𝑣𝑗) ,
(4)
where 𝑉𝑖, 𝑉𝑗denote their vocab sets. The mutual information for
all pairs of features can be pre-computed.
Correlated Feature Masking. With the pre-computed mutual in-
formation, we propose Correlated Feature Masking (CFM) that
exploits the feature-dependency patterns for more meaningful SSL
tasks. For the set of masked features, 𝐹𝑚, we seek to mask highly
correlated features together. We do so by first uniformly sample a
seed feature 𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑from all the available features 𝐹= {𝑓1, ..., 𝑓𝑘}, and
then select the top-n most correlated features 𝐹𝑐= {𝑓𝑐,1, ..., 𝑓𝑐,𝑛}
according to their mutual information with 𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑. The final 𝐹𝑚
will be the union of the seed and set of correlated features, i.e.,
𝐹𝑚= {𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑, 𝑓𝑐,1, ..., 𝑓𝑐,𝑛}. We choose 𝑛= ⌊𝑘/2⌋so that the masked
and retained set of features have roughly the same size. We change
the seed feature per batch so that the SSL task will learn on various
kinds of masking patterns.
3.3
Multi-task Training
To enable SSL learned representations to help improve the learning
for the main supervised task such as regression or classification, we
leverage a multi-task training strategy where the main supervised
task and the auxiliary SSL task are jointly optimized. Precisely, let
{(𝑞𝑖,𝑥𝑖)} be a batch of query-item pairs sampled from the training
data distribution D𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛, and let {𝑥𝑖} be a batch of items sampled
from an item distribution D𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚. Then the joint loss is:
L = L𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛
 {(𝑞𝑖,𝑥𝑖)} + 𝛼· L𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓
 {𝑥𝑖},
(5)
where L𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛is the loss function for the main task capturing inter-
action between query and item, and 𝛼is the regularization strength.
Heterogeneous Sample Distributions. The marginal item distribu-
tion from D𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛typically follows a power-law. Therefore, using
the training item distribution for L𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓would cause the learned
feature relationship to be biased towards head items. Instead, we
sample items uniformly from the corpus for L𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓. In other words,
D𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚is the uniform item distribution. In practice, we find using
the heterogeneous distributions for main and ssl tasks is critical for
SSL to achieve superior performance.
Loss for Main Task. There could be many choices for the main
loss depending on the objectives. In this paper, we consider the
batch softmax loss used in both recommenders [39] and NLP [16] for
optimizing top-k accuracy. In detail, let q𝑖, x𝑖be the embeddings of
query and item examples (𝑞𝑖,𝑥𝑖) after being encoded by two neural
networks, then for a batch of pairs {(𝑞𝑖,𝑥𝑖)}𝑁
𝑖=1 and temperature 𝜏,
the batch softmax cross entropy loss is
L𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛= −1
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖∈[𝑁]
log
exp (𝑠(q𝑖, x𝑖)/𝜏)
Í
𝑗∈[𝑁] exp (𝑠(q𝑖, x𝑗)/𝜏) .
(6)
4
feature embeddings
DNN
embedding
query features
feature embeddings
DNN
embedding
item features
supervised loss
feature embeddings
DNN
embedding
augmented item features
feature embeddings
DNN
embedding
augmented item features
self-supervised loss
feature augmentation: masking + dropout
share
share
Figure 3: Model architecture: Two-tower model with SSL. In the SSL task, we apply feature masking and dropout on the item
features to learn item embeddings. The whole item tower (in red) is shared with the supervised task.
Other Baselines. As mentioned in Section 2, we use two-tower
DNNs as the baseline model for main task. Two-tower model has
the unique property of encoding item features compared to classic
matrix factorization (MF) and classification models. While the latter
two methods are also applicable to large-scale item retrieval, they
only learn item embeddings based on IDs, and thus do not fit in our
proposal of using SSL for exploiting item feature relations.
4
OFFLINE EXPERIMENTS
We provide empirical results to demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed self-supervised framework both in academic public
dataset and in actual large-scale recommendation products. The ex-
periments are designed to answer the following research questions.
• RQ1: Does the proposed SSL Framework improve deep models
for recommendations?
• RQ2: SSL is designed to improve primary supervised task through
introduced SSL task on unlabeled examples. What is the impact
of the amount of training data on the improvement from SSL?
• RQ3: How do the SSL parameters, i.e., loss multiplier 𝛼and
dropout rate in data augmentation, affect model quality?
• RQ4: How does RFM perform compared to CFM? What is the
benefit of leveraging feature correlations in data augmentation?
The above questions are addressed in order from Section 4.3 - 4.5.
4.1
Datasets
We conduct experiments on two large-scale datasets that both come
with a rich set of item metadata features. We formulate their primary
supervised task as an item-to-item recommendation problem to
study the effects of SSL on training recommender (in this case,
retrieval) models. See Appendix .1 for details about the statistics of
these two datasets.
Wikipedia [14]: The first dataset focuses on the problem of
link prediction between Wikipedia pages. It consists of pairs of
pages (𝑥,𝑦) ∈𝜒× 𝜒, where 𝑥indicates a source page, and 𝑦is a
destination page linked from 𝑥. The goal is to predict the set of pages
that are likely to be linked to a given source page from the whole
corpus of web pages. Each page is represented by a feature vector
𝑥= (𝑥𝑖𝑑,𝑥𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑠,𝑥𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑠), where all the features are categorical.
Here, 𝑥𝑖𝑑denotes the one-hot encoding of the page URL, 𝑥𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑠
denotes a bag-of-words representation of the set of n-grams of the
page’s title, and 𝑥𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑠denotes a bag-of-words representation of the
categories that the page belongs to. We partitioned the dataset into
training and evaluation using a (90%, 10%) split, following the same
treatment in [23] and [39].
App-to-App Install (AAI): The AAI dataset was collected on
the app landing pages from a commercial mobile app store. On a
particular app’s (seed app) landing page, the app installs (candidate
apps) from the section of recommended apps were collected. Each
training example represents a pair of seed-candidate pairs denoted
as (𝑥𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑,𝑥𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒) and their metadata features. The goal is to
recommend highly similar apps given a seed app. This is also formu-
lated as an item-to-item recommendation problem via a multi-class
classification loss. Note that we only collect positive examples, i.e.,
𝑥𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒is an installed app from the landing page of 𝑥𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑. All the
impressed recommended apps with no installs are all ignored since
we consider them more like weak positives instead of negatives
for building retrieval models. Each item (app) is represented by a
feature vector x with the following features:
• id: Application id as a one-hot categorical feature.
• developer_name: Name of the app developer as a one-hot cate-
gorical feature.
• categories: Semantic categories of the app as a multi-hot cate-
gorical feature.
• title_unigram: Uni-grams of the app title as a multi-hot categor-
ical feature.
4.2
Experiment Setup
Backbone Network. For the main task that predicts relevant items
given the query, we use the two-tower DNN to encode query and
items features (see Figure 1) as the backbone network. The item-
to-item recommendation problem is formalized as a multi-class
classification problem, using the batch softmax loss presented in
Equation (6) as the loss function. For discussions of the choice
of backbone network, we refer the readers to related sections in
Section 2 and Section 3.3.
Hyper-parameters. For the backbone two-tower DNN, we search
the set of hyper-parameters such as the learning rate, softmax tem-
perature (𝜏) and model architecture that gives the highest Recall@50
on the validation set. Note that the training batch size in batch soft-
max is critical for model quality as it determines the number of
negatives used for each positive item. Throughout this section, we
use batch sizes 1024 and 4096 for Wikipedia and AAI respectively.
We also tuned the number of hidden layers, hidden layer sizes
and softmax temperature 𝜏for the baseline models. For Wikipedia
5
dataset, we use softmax temperature 𝜏= 0.07, and ℎ𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑛_𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟𝑠
with sizes [1024, 128]. For AAI, we use 𝜏= 0.06 and ℎ𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑛_𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟𝑠
[1024, 256]. Note that the dimension of last hidden layer is also
the dimension of final query and item embeddings. All models are
trained with Adagrad [13] optimizer with learning rate 0.01.
We consider two SSL parameters: 1) the SSL loss multiplier 𝛼
in equation (5), and 2) the feature dropout rate, denoted as 𝑑𝑟,
in the second phase of data augmentation (see Section 3.2). For
each augmentation method (e.g., CFM, RFM), we conduct grid
search of the two parameters by ranges 𝛼= [0.1, 0.3, 1.0, 3.0],𝑑𝑟=
[0.1, 0.2, ..., 0.9], and report the best result.
Evaluation. To evaluate the recommendation performance given
a seed item, we compute and find the top 𝐾items with the highest
cosine similarity from the whole corpus and evaluate the quality
based on the 𝐾retrieved items. Note this is a relatively challenging
task, given the sparsity of the dataset and large number of items
in the corpus. We adopt popular standard metrics 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙@𝐾and
mean average precision (𝑀𝐴𝑃@𝐾) to evaluate recommendation
performance [18]. For each configuration of experiment results, we
ran the experiment 5 times and report the average.
4.3
Effectiveness of SSL with Correlated
Feature Masking
To answer RQ1, we first evaluate the impact of SSL on model
quality. We focus on using CFM followed by dropout as the data
augmentation technique. We will show the superior performance
of CFM over other variants in Section 4.5.
We consider three baseline methods:
• Baseline: Vanilla backbone network with the two-tower DNN
architecture.
• Feature Dropout (FD) [35]: Backbone model with random feature
dropout on the item tower in the supervised learning task. The
feature dropout on item features could be treated as data aug-
mentation. FD does not have the additional SSL regularization
compared to our approach.
• Spread-out Regularization (SO) [41]: Backbone model with spread-
out regularization on the item tower as a regularization. The SO
regularization shares similar contrastive loss as that in our SSL
framework. However, it applies contrastive learning on original
examples without any data augmentation, and is thus different
from our approach.
The latter two methods are chosen since they are (1) model-agnostic
and scalable for industrial-size recommendation systems; (2) com-
patible with categorical sparse features for improving generaliza-
tion. In addition, FD can be viewed as an ablation study to isolate
the potential improvement from contrastive learning. Similarly, SO
is included to isolate the improvement from feature augmentation.
We observe that with full datasets (see Table 1), CFM consis-
tently performs the best compared with non-SSL regularization
techniques. On AAI, CFM out-performs the next best method by
8.69% relatively and on AAI by 3.98%. This helps answer RQ1 that
the proposed SSL framework and tasks indeed improves model per-
formance for recommenders. By comparing CFM with SO, it shows
that the data augmentation is critical for the SSL regularization
to have better performance. Without any data augmentation, the
Wikipedia
Method
MAP@10
MAP@50
Recall@10
Recall@50
Baseline
0.0171
0.0229
0.0537
0.1930
FD [35]
0.0172
0.0229
0.0535
0.1912
SO [41]
0.0176
0.0235
0.0549
0.1956
Our method
0.0183
0.0243
0.057
0.2009
AAI
Method
MAP@10
MAP@50
Recall@10
Recall@50
Baseline
0.1257
0.1363
0.2793
0.4983
FD [35]
0.1278
0.1384
0.2840
0.5058
SO [41]
0.1300
0.1406
0.2870
0.5076
Our method
0.1413
0.1522
0.3078
0.5355
Table 1: Results on the full Wikipedia and AAI dataset.
proposed SSL method is reduced to SO. By comparing CFM and FD,
we find the feature augmentation is more effective when applied to
the SSL task than to the supervised task as a standard regularization
technique. Note that FD, as a well known approach for improving
generalization in some cases, applies feature augmentation together
with supervised training.
Head-tail Analysis. To understand the gain from SSL, we further
break down the overall performance by looking at different item
slices by item popularity. The splitting of the head and tail test
set is described in the appendix .2. Our hypothesis is that SSL
generally helps improve the performance for slices without much
supervision (e.g., tail items). The results evaluated on the tail and
head test sets are reported the results in Table 3. We observe that
the proposed SSL methods improve the performance for both head
and tail item recommendations, with larger gains from the tail
items. For instance, in AAI, the CFM improves over 51.5% of the
Recall@10 on tail items, while the improvement is 8.57% on head.
Effects of SSL Parameters (RQ3). Figure 5 summarizes the Re-
call@50 evaluated on the Wikipedia and AAI dataset w.r.t. the
regularization strength 𝛼. It also shows the results of SO which
shares the same regularization parameter. We observe that with
increasing 𝛼, the model performance is worse than the baseline
model (shown in dash line) after certain threshold. This is expected,
since large SSL weight 𝛼leads to the multitask loss L dominated
by 𝛼· L𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓in equation (5). By further comparing our approach
with SO, we show that the SSL based regularization outperforms
SO in a wide range of 𝛼. Figure 6 shows the model performance
across different dropout rates 𝑑𝑟. It also shows 𝐷𝑂which shares
the same parameter. As 𝑑𝑟increases, the model performance of 𝐷𝑂
continues to deteriorate. For most choices of 𝛼(except 𝛼= 0.1), 𝐷𝑂
is worse than the baseline. For the SSL task with feature dropout,
the model performance peaks when 𝑑𝑟= 0.3 and then deteriorates
when we further improve dropout rate. The model starts to under-
perform the baseline when 𝑑𝑟is too large. This observation aligns
with our expectation in the sense that when the rate is too large,
the input information becomes too little for to learn meaningful
representations through SSL.
Visualization of Item Representations. We visualize the learned
app embeddings from the AAI dataset in t-SNE plot. We postpone
6
(a) Baseline Model
(b) Best SSL Model
Figure 4: Comparison of t-SNE plots for app embeddings for
baseline, and our best SSL model.
the detailed setup to Appendix .3. As shown in in Figure 4, we clearly
see that apps embeddings learned with our SSL regularization are
better clustered according to their own categories, compared to the
counter parts of our baseline, which demonstrates that representa-
tions learned through SSL have stronger semantic structures. This
partially explains the gain from SSL.
4.4
Data Sparsity
We study the effectiveness of CFM in presence of sparse data to
address RQ2. We uniformly down-sampled 10% of training data and
evaluate on the same (full) test dataset. Experiment results are re-
ported in Table 2. With increased data sparsity, CFM demonstrates
larger improvement for Wikipedia and AAI respectively. In partic-
ular, the CFM on the full Wikipedia dataset improves Recall@10
by 6.1% compared to the baseline, while the relative improvement
is 20.6% on the 10% dataset. Similar trend is observed for the AAI
dataset (10.2% vs 25.7% on the down-sampled dataset). It’s worth
noting that, CFM consistently outperforms FD and the gap is larger
as data becomes sparser. This demonstrates that having dropout
for data augmentation in SSL tasks is more effective than directly
applying dropout in supervised task.
As a summary, these findings answer research questions raised
in RQ2 that the proposed SSL framework improves model perfor-
mance more with even less supervision.
4.5
Comparison of Different Data
Augmentations
In this section, we compare several feature augmentation alter-
natives with CFM to answer RQ4 by studying: 1) the benefit of
10% Wikipedia Dataset
Method
MAP@10
MAP@50
Recall@10
Recall@50
Baseline
0.0077
0.0105
0.0237
0.0924
FD [35]
0.0089
0.0120
0.0272
0.1046
SO [41]
0.0083
0.0112
0.0254
0.0978
Our method
0.0093
0.0126
0.0286
0.1093
10% AAI Dataset
Method
MAP@10
MAP@50
Recall@10
Recall@50
Baseline
0.1112
0.1194
0.2406
0.4068
FD [35]
0.1217
0.1302
0.2611
0.4324
SO [41]
0.1220
0.1308
0.2632
0.4400
Our method
0.1409
0.1507
0.3024
0.5014
Table 2: Experiment results trained on the sparse (10% down-
sampled) Wikipedia and AAI datasets.
Wikipedia
Method
Tail
Head
Recall@10
Recall@50
Recall@10
Recall@50
Baseline
0.0472
0.1621
0.0610
0.2273
FD
0.0474
0.1638
0.0593
0.2212
SO
0.0481
0.1644
0.0606
0.2268
Our method
0.0524
0.1749
0.0619
0.2283
AAI
Baseline
0.0475
0.2333
0.2846
0.4993
FD
0.0727
0.2743
0.2849
0.5069
SO
0.0661
0.2602
0.2879
0.5086
Our method
0.0720
0.2906
0.309
0.537
Table 3: Results of Wikipedia and AAI on tail and head item
slices.
Figure 5: Impact of regularization strength 𝛼for SSL-based
and spread-out regularization methods. The vertical dash
line indicates the baseline model’s metric.
exploiting feature correlation in masking and 2) benefit of using
dropout as part of augmentation. In specific, we consider the fol-
lowing alternatives:
• 𝑅𝐹𝑀: Random Feature Masking. In this method, random set of
features are masked, instead of guided by mutual information
in CFM.
• 𝑅𝐹𝑀𝑛𝑜_𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙: Random Feature Masking with no Complemen-
tary sets of features applied. In this method, 2 independent sets
of features are masked at random, instead of a complementary
pair of masks in CFM.
7
Figure 6: Impact of dropout rate 𝑑𝑟for our method and the
standard dropout training on the Wikipedia dataset.
Comparison of Multiple Data Augmentations
Method
MAP@10
MAP@50
Recall@10
Recall@50
Baseline
0.1257
0.1363
0.2793
0.4983
CFM
0.1413
0.1522
0.3078
0.5355
RFM
0.1281
0.1389
0.2851
0.5104
𝑅𝐹𝑀𝑛𝑜_𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙
0.1363
0.1472
0.3007
0.5290
𝐶𝐹𝑀𝑛𝑜_𝑑𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑜𝑢𝑡
0.1309
0.1417
0.2898
0.5150
𝑁𝑜𝑀𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔
0.1303
0.1408
0.2868
0.5053
Table 4: Results of CFM and other data augmentation tech-
niques on the AAI dataset.
• 𝐶𝐹𝑀𝑛𝑜_𝑑𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑜𝑢𝑡: Correlated Feature Masking with No Dropout
applied. In other words, only apply correlated masking as the
augmentation in the SSL task.
• 𝑁𝑜𝑀𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔: Correlated Feature Masking but skipping the mask-
ing phrase in augmentation. In other words, we only apply
dropout to features as the augmentation.
We apply these feature augmentation functions in the SSL frame-
work and report the results on AAI dataset in Table 4.
First, we observe that all the variants are worse than CFM, but
still out-perform the baseline model. In particular, we see having
mutual information in selecting the masking set is critical to model
improvement, since we see the biggest performance drop is from
RFM where masking set is selected at random. By comparing CFM
with results from the two methods (𝑅𝐹𝑀𝑛𝑜_𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙and 𝑁𝑜𝑀𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔)
that allow feature overlap between the two augmented examples
via independent dropout, we see the contrastive learning task is
more helpful with complementary information that potentially
avoids shortcut in learning. Finally, by comparing 𝐶𝐹𝑀𝑛𝑜_𝑑𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑜𝑢𝑡
and CFM, we see the second phrase of randomly dropping out
feature values also helps, which could be potentially explained by
introducing more feature variants in the SSL task.
5
LIVE EXPERIMENT
In this section, we describe how we apply our proposed SSL frame-
work to a web-scale commercial app recommender system. Specifi-
cally, given an app as the query, the system identifies similar apps
(a) Global
(b) Localized
Figure 7: Top Business Metric Improvement Percentage (y-
axis) over Days (x-axis) in Online Experiments: (a) improve-
ment globally; (b) improvement on a localized market.
given the query. One of the models surfacing this recommendation
is trained on the AAI dataset as described in Section 4.1, with the
same backbone network structure as the two-tower DNN struc-
ture in Figure 1 (with modifications). For a natural extension of
the offline experiments conducted on Section 4.3 for the AAI ex-
periments, we conducted an A/B experiment for investigating the
synergy of deploying the best SSL-based model online. While we
already presented improved offline metrics on this dataset, in many
real-world systems, offline studies might not align with live impact
due to 1) lack of implicit feedback, since the offline evaluation data
is collected via user engagement history based on the production
system; 2) failing to capture product’s multiple objectives optimiza-
tion goal, where it’s very likely that recommending more engaging
apps hurts other business goals. Therefore, this experiment is criti-
cal in demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed framework
in real-world settings.
In our live A/B testing, we add the best performing SSL task with
the same set of hyper-parameters on top of the existing well-tuned
two-tower DNN model used in production. In a time frame of 14
days, the model improved the overall business metrics significantly,
with +0.67% increase in key user engagement (Figure 8a) and +1.5%
increase in top business metric (Figure 7a). To echo the study on
the Head-tail Analysis in Section 4.3 and the data sparsity analysis
in Section 4.4, we see significant improvements on two slices: 1)
cold-starting for fresh apps: the model improves +4.5% on user en-
gagement for fresh apps (Figure 8b); and (2) international countries
that have sparser training data compared to major markets: we see
significant +5.47% top business metric gains (Figure 7b right). Again,
both of these results verify our hypothesis that our SSL framework
indeed significantly improves model performance for slices without
much supervision. Given the results, the SSL empowered model
was successfully launched in the current production system.
6
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a model architecture agnostic self-supervised
learning (SSL) framework for large-scale neural recommender mod-
els. Within the SSL framework, we also introduced a novel data
augmentation applicable to heterogeneous categorical features and
showed its superior performance over other variants.
For future works, we plan to investigate how different training
schemes impact the model quality. One direction is to first pre-train
8
(a) All Apps
(b) Fresh Apps
Figure 8: Top User Engagement Improvement Percentage (y-
axis) over Days (x-axis) in Online Experiments: (a) improve-
ment on all apps; (b) improvement on fresh apps.
on SSL task to learn query and item representations and fine-tune
on primary supervised tasks. Alternatively, it would be interesting
to extend the technique for deep models in application domains
such as search ranking or pCTR prediction.
REFERENCES
[1] Alex Beutel, Ed H. Chi, Zhiyuan Cheng, Hubert Pham, and John Anderson. [n.d.].
Beyond Globally Optimal: Focused Learning for Improved Recommendations. In
WWW 2017.
[2] L. Beyer, X. Zhai, A. Oliver, and A. Kolesnikov. [n.d.]. S4L: Self-Supervised
Semi-Supervised Learning. In ICCV 2019.
[3] Wei-Cheng Chang, Felix X. Yu, Yin-Wen Chang, Yiming Yang, and Sanjiv Kumar.
[n.d.]. Pre-training Tasks for Embedding-based Large-scale Retrieval. In ICLR
2020.
[4] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. [n.d.]. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting
System. In KDD 2016.
[5] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2020.
A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2002.05709
[6] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Kevin Swersky, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey
Hinton. 2020. Big Self-Supervised Models are Strong Semi-Supervised Learners.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10029 (2020).
[7] Heng-Tze Cheng, Levent Koc, Jeremiah Harmsen, Tal Shaked, Tushar Chandra,
Hrishi Aradhye, Glen Anderson, Greg Corrado, Wei Chai, Mustafa Ispir, Rohan
Anil, Zakaria Haque, Lichan Hong, Vihan Jain, Xiaobing Liu, and Hemal Shah.
[n.d.]. Wide & Deep Learning for Recommender Systems (DLRS 2016).
[8] Evangelia Christakopoulou and George Karypis. [n.d.]. Local Latent Space Models
for Top-N Recommendation.
[9] Edith Cohen and David D. Lewis. [n.d.]. Approximating Matrix Multiplication
for Pattern Recognition Tasks. In SODA 1997.
[10] Paul Covington, Jay Adams, and Emre Sargin. [n.d.]. Deep Neural Networks for
YouTube Recommendations. In RecSys 2016.
[11] Maurizio Ferrari Dacrema, Paolo Cremonesi, and Dietmar Jannach. [n.d.]. Are
We Really Making Much Progress? A Worrying Analysis of Recent Neural Rec-
ommendation Approaches. In RecSys 2019.
[12] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. [n.d.]. BERT:
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In
NAACL-HLT 2019.
[13] John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. 2011. Adaptive Subgradient Methods
for Online Learning and Stochastic Optimization. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, null
(July 2011), 2121–2159.
[14] Wikimedia Foundation. [n.d.]. Wikimedia. https://dumps.wikimedia.org/
[15] Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis. [n.d.]. Unsupervised
Representation Learning by Predicting Image Rotations. In ICLR 2018.
[16] Daniel Gillick, Alessandro Presta, and Gaurav Singh Tomar. 2018. End-to-End
Retrieval in Continuous Space. CoRR abs/1811.08008 (2018). http://arxiv.org/
abs/1811.08008
[17] Chuan Guo, Ali Mousavi, Xiang Wu, Daniel N Holtmann-Rice, Satyen Kale,
Sashank Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar. 2019.
Breaking the Glass Ceiling for
Embedding-Based Classifiers for Large Output Spaces. In Neurips, H. Wallach,
H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (Eds.).
[18] Xiangnan He, Lizi Liao, Hanwang Zhang, Liqiang Nie, Xia Hu, and Tat-Seng
Chua. [n.d.]. Neural Collaborative Filtering. In WWW 2017.
[19] Xinran He, Junfeng Pan, Ou Jin, Tianbing Xu, Bo Liu, Tao Xu, Yanxin Shi, Antoine
Atallah, Ralf Herbrich, Stuart Bowers, and Joaquin Quiñonero Candela. 2014.
Practical Lessons from Predicting Clicks on Ads at Facebook. In Proceedings of
the Eighth International Workshop on Data Mining for Online Advertising.
[20] Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiaohua Zhai, and Lucas Beyer. [n.d.]. Revisiting Self-
Supervised Visual Representation Learning. In CVPR 2019.
[21] Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and Chris Volinsky. 2009. Matrix Factorization Tech-
niques for Recommender Systems. Computer 42, 8 (Aug. 2009), 30–37.
[22] Yehuda Koren and Robert M. Bell. 2015. Advances in Collaborative Filtering.
Springer, 77–118.
[23] Walid Krichene, Nicolas Mayoraz, Steffen Rendle, Li Zhang, Xinyang Yi, Lichan
Hong, Ed Chi, and John Anderson. [n.d.]. Efficient Training on Very Large
Corpora via Gramian Estimation. In ICLR 2019.
[24] Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush
Sharma, and Radu Soricut. [n.d.]. ALBERT: A Lite BERT for Self-supervised
Learning of Language Representations. In ICLR 2020.
[25] Gustav Larsson, Michael Maire, and Gregory Shakhnarovich. [n.d.]. Learning
Representations for Automatic Colorization. In ECCV 2016.
[26] David C. Liu, Stephanie Rogers, Raymond Shiau, Dmitry Kislyuk, Kevin C. Ma,
Zhigang Zhong, Jenny Liu, and Yushi Jing. [n.d.]. Related Pins at Pinterest: The
Evolution of a Real-World Recommender System. In WWW 2017.
[27] Jianxin Ma, Chang Zhou, Hongxia Yang, Peng Cui, Xin Wang, and Wenwu Zhu.
[n.d.]. Disentangled Self-Supervision in Sequential Recommenders. In KDD 2020.
[28] Klaas Bosteels Mark Levy. [n.d.]. Music Recommendation and the Long Tail. In
1st Workshop On Music Recommendation And Discovery (WOMRAD), ACM RecSys,
2010.
[29] Rishabh Mehrotra, Mounia Lalmas, Doug Kenney, Thomas Lim-Meng, and Golli
Hashemian. [n.d.]. Jointly Leveraging Intent and Interaction Signals to Predict
User Satisfaction with Slate Recommendations. In WWW 2019.
[30] Staša Milojević. 2010. Power Law Distributions in Information Science: Making
the Case for Logarithmic Binning. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 61, 12 (Dec. 2010),
2417–2425.
[31] Maxim Naumov, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Hao-Jun Michael Shi, Jianyu Huang,
Narayanan Sundaraman, Jongsoo Park, Xiaodong Wang, Udit Gupta, Carole-Jean
Wu, Alisson G. Azzolini, Dmytro Dzhulgakov, Andrey Mallevich, Ilia Cherni-
avskii, Yinghai Lu, Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi, Ansha Yu, Volodymyr Kon-
dratenko, Stephanie Pereira, Xianjie Chen, Wenlin Chen, Vijay Rao, Bill Jia, Liang
Xiong, and Misha Smelyanskiy. 2019. Deep Learning Recommendation Model
for Personalization a