SimClusters: Community-Based Representations for
Heterogeneous Recommendations at Twitter
Venu Satuluri, Yao Wu
Twitter, Inc.
{vsatuluri, yaow}@twitter.com
Xun Zheng∗
Carnegie Mellon University
xunzheng@cs.cmu.edu
Yilei Qian, Brian Wichers, Qieyun Dai
Gui Ming Tang, Jerry Jiang
Twitter, Inc.
Jimmy Lin
University of Waterloo
jimmylin@uwaterloo.ca
ABSTRACT
Personalized recommendation products at Twitter target a multi-
tude of heterogeneous items: Tweets, Events, Topics, Hashtags, and
users. Each of these targets varies in their cardinality (which affects
the scale of the problem) and their “shelf life” (which constrains
the latency of generating the recommendations). Although Twitter
has built a variety of recommendation systems before dating back
a decade, solutions to the broader problem were mostly tackled
piecemeal. In this paper, we present SimClusters, a general-purpose
representation layer based on overlapping communities into which
users as well as heterogeneous content can be captured as sparse, in-
terpretable vectors to support a multitude of recommendation tasks.
We propose a novel algorithm for community discovery based on
Metropolis-Hastings sampling, which is both more accurate and sig-
nificantly faster than off-the-shelf alternatives. SimClusters scales
to networks with billions of users and has been effective across a
variety of deployed applications at Twitter.
ACM Reference Format:
Venu Satuluri, Yao Wu, Xun Zheng, Yilei Qian, Brian Wichers, Qieyun Dai,
Gui Ming Tang, Jerry Jiang, and Jimmy Lin. 2020. SimClusters: Community-
Based Representations for Heterogeneous Recommendations at Twitter. In
Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (KDD ’20), August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, CA, USA. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403370
1
INTRODUCTION
Personalized recommendations lie at the heart of many different
technology-enabled products, and Twitter is no exception. Our high-
level goal is to make content discovery effortless and to free the user
from the need for manual curation. On the Twitter platform, a wide
variety of content types are displayed in a multitude of contexts,
requiring a variety of personalization approaches. For example,
recommendations of interesting Tweets are an essential component
of not only the Home tab, but also for dissemination via email or
∗Work was done while interning at Twitter.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, CA, USA
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7998-4/20/08...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403370
Recommendation
Problem (i.e., target)
Item
Cardinality
Shelf
Life
Display
Location
User recommendations
∼109
Weeks
Who To Follow
Topic Tweet
recommendations
∼108
Hours
Home,
Explore
Out of network
Tweet recommendations
∼108
Hours
Home
Similar Tweet
recommendations
∼108
Hours
Tweet
details page
Event recommendations
∼103
Hours
Explore
Trending Hashtags
∼105
Hours
Explore
Table 1: A partial list of recommendations problems at Twit-
ter along with the number of possible recommendable items,
the shelf life of the recommendations, and where they are
shown on Twitter.
push notifications. The “Who To Follow” module with user follow
recommendations is crucial, especially for new users, and was one of
the first recommendations products to be launched on Twitter [11].
Trends and Events (previously called Moments) are essential for
informing the user about currently ongoing news stories and topics
of conversation on the platform, and the Explore tab shows the user
a personalized list of these. The recently launched Topics feature1
lets users follow Topics (such as “Machine Learning” or “K-Pop”)
and see the algorithmically curated best tweets about those Topics
in their Home feed.
A summary of the diversity of personalized recommendation
problems at Twitter is presented in Table 1. In all cases, we are
making recommendations to users, but what we’re recommending
can be heterogeneous. For example, we could be suggesting users,
Tweets, Events, Topics, or hashtags. There are two main dimensions
of interest across the different recommendations problems: the
cardinality of the items being recommended and the shelf life of
the computed recommendations. The shelf life of our computed
recommendations is closely related to the churn we observe in
the recommended content. For example, since the follower graph
changes relatively slowly, user follow recommendations can remain
relevant for weeks (and thus can be computed in batch). At the
other end of the spectrum, Tweet recommendations become stale
much quicker and must be generated in an online system in close to
real time; for this case, batch computations would not yield results
fast enough to meet the product requirements. Naturally, in the
case of recommendation problems where the item cardinality is
large, being able to handle the scale of the problem is important.
1https://blog.twitter.com/en_us/topics/product/2019/introducing-topics.html
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
3183
Previously, Twitter built systems to tackle each of these differ-
ent recommendation problems individually with little re-use or
commonality. The original example here is the “Who To Follow”
system that launched a decade ago [11] for user recommendations.
Subsequently, Gupta et al. [12] described a specialized system to
generate Tweet recommendations in real time, insights from which
were later deployed in GraphJet [31]. GraphJet ingested the real-
time stream of user-Tweet engagements to maintain a user-Tweet
bipartite graph from which to generate recommendations, but the
system was expensive to extend to new use cases. These aforemen-
tioned infrastructures were built mainly to generate candidates
which got blended and scored subsequently. Twitter also built cus-
tom infrastructure for feature retrieval and scoring of arbitrarily
generated candidates - examples include RealGraph [14] and Rec-
Service [9]. All of these systems were built with the aim of solving
specific sub-problems in the recommendations landscape at Twitter
and require separate development and maintenance. The central
motivating question of this paper is: can we build a general system
that helps us advance the accuracy of all or most of the Twitter
products which require personalization and recommendations?
The solution proposed in this paper is built on the insight that
we can construct, from the user–user graph, a general-purpose
representation based on community structure, where each com-
munity is characterized by a set of influencers that many people
in that community follow. Each of the different kinds of content
(i.e., the targets in Table 1) is represented as a vector in the space of
these communities, with the entry corresponding to the 𝑖-th com-
munity for item 𝑗indicating how interested the 𝑖-th community is
in item 𝑗. The end result is that we can represent heterogeneous
recommendation targets as sparse, interpretable vectors in the same
space, which enables solutions for a wide variety of recommenda-
tion and personalization tasks (see details in Section 6). There are
two notable aspects of our design:
(1) We avoid conventional matrix factorization methods that typ-
ically require solving massive numerical optimization prob-
lems, and instead rely on a combination of similarity search
and community discovery, both of which are easier to scale.
A key algorithmic innovation of our work is a new approach
to community discovery — called Neighborhood-aware MH —
which is 10×-100× faster, 3×-4× more accurate than off-the-
shelf baselines, and scales easily to graphs with ∼109 nodes and
∼1011 edges. It helps us discover ∼105 communities on Twitter
that are either organized around a common topic (e.g., “K-Pop”
or “Machine Learning”) or based on social relationships (e.g.,
those who work together or went to high-school together). We
have open-sourced the implementation of the new algorithm
in https://github.com/twitter/sbf.
(2) Our overall architecture has a modular and extensible design to
enable the use of whichever computing paradigm is most suited
to a specific component – batch-distributed, batch-multicore,
or streaming-distributed. In particular, the ability to dynami-
cally update representations using streaming-distributed com-
ponents has proved crucial for accurately modeling Tweets
which are Twitter’s most important type of content.
We refer to our overall system as SimClusters (Similarity-based
Clusters) and have deployed it in production for more than a year.
SimClusters also has the following features, which correspond to
our design requirements:
(1) Universal representations: SimClusters provides representa-
tions for both users and a variety of content in the same space.
This removes the need to invest in expensive custom infrastruc-
ture for each type of content.
(2) Computational scale: We are able to apply SimClusters at Twit-
ter scale, with ∼109 users, ∼1011 edges between them, and 108
new Tweets every day with ∼109 user engagements per day.
(3) Accuracy beyond the head: SimClusters representations are
accurate beyond just the most popular content (“head”), pri-
marily due to the ability to scale SimClusters to a very large
representational space with ∼105 dimensions.
(4) Item and graph churn: The modular design of SimClusters
makes it easy to extend to dynamic items which rapidly rise
and diminish in popularity. Many of our important recommen-
dations and engagement prediction problem involve items that
churn rapidly – most Tweets, Events, and Trends stay relevant
for no more than a day or two, meaning that it is crucial to
be able to efficiently learn representations of new items before
they lose their relevance.
(5) Interpretability: SimClusters representations are sparse and
each dimension corresponds to a specific community, making
them interpretable to a degree that is hard to obtain with alter-
natives such as matrix factorization or graph embeddings.
(6) Efficient nearest neighbor search: Identifying nearest neighbors
is core to many downstream tasks such as generating recom-
mendations, similar item retrieval, and user targeting. The spar-
sity of SimClusters representations makes it easy to setup and
maintain inverted indices for retrieving nearest neighbors, even
for rapidly churning domains (see details in Section 4).
SimClusters has been applied to many recommendations and per-
sonalization problems at Twitter — even for mature products such as
out-of-network Tweet recommendations and Personalized Trends,
SimClusters has enabled double digit improvements in the engage-
ment rates of recommendations. It has also accelerated the building
of entirely new products, such as Similar Tweets and Topic Tweet
recommendations. SimClusters continues to be actively developed
internally and applied to new use cases.
2
OVERVIEW OF SIMCLUSTERS
The SimClusters system (see Figure 1) consists of two stages:
(1) In the first stage (detailed in Section 3), we discover bipartite
communities from our user-user graph at scale, resulting in
learning sparse, non-negative representations for our users. At
the end of this stage, each user is associated with a list of com-
munities they participate in, along with the scores quantifying
the strength of their affiliation to each of those communities.
We refer to this output as “User Interest Representations” and
it is made available in both offline data warehouses as well
as low-latency online stores, indexed by the user id. This first
stage is run in a batch-distributed setting, typically as a series
of MapReduce jobs running on Hadoop.
(2) The second stage (detailed in Section 4) consists of several jobs
running in parallel, each of which calculates the representations
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
3184
Community 
Discovery 
(Batch-Distributed)
User Interest 
Representations 
->C1:0.8
->C2:0.9
...
Slow evolving
graphs e.g. 
User-User graph
Offline Calculate Item 
Representations
(Batch-Distributed)
Slow-evolving e.g. User 
Influence Representations 
->C1:0.7
->C2:0.85
...
Online Calculate Item 
Representations
(Streaming-Distributed)
Fast evolving 
graphs e.g.
User-Tweet graph
Fast-evolving e.g. 
Tweet  Representations 
->C1:0.7
->C2:0.85
...
User-User
graph
Applications
1. Generate Recommendations
2. Features for ML models
3. Item similarity 
4. Adhoc analytics
....
Stage 1
(Section 3)
Stage 2 
(Section 4)
Figure 1: Overview of SimClusters. Stage 1 detects bipartite
communities from the user-user graph, which is fed to Stage
2 which runs several item representation jobs in parallel. For
illustration, the color of the users and items in this figure
indicates what community they get assigned to. In actuality,
both users and items can participate in multiple communi-
ties.
for a specific recommendation target, using a user–target bipar-
tite graph formed from interaction logs on the platform. Each
job in the second stage operates in either a batch-distributed
setting or a streaming-distributed setting, depending on the
shelf-life of the recommendation target and the churn in the
corresponding user–target bipartite graph.
The most important detail about our design is that it’s based on
discovering communities from the user–user graph. While the other
user–target graphs on Twitter evolve rapidly, the user–user graph
is relatively long-term and stable, and the specific communities
discovered from the graph often outlive specific edges or nodes in
the graph. In addition, the user-user graph usually also has more
coverage, in the sense that there are a lot more users who have a
minimum number of edges in this graph compared to the other
user-item graphs.
The other important aspect of our design is its modularity. The
different parts of the pipeline depend on each other only via offline
data sets or online key-value stores, meaning that they are robust
to delays in the preceding steps. It is also easy to swap out existing
implementations with new variants, or run multiple implementa-
tions in parallel, as long as the output is in the format expected
by the downstream jobs. The system degrades gracefully in the
presence of bugs and errors - if any one of the item representation
jobs has an issue, the other item representation jobs can still service
their applications. Our design also allows for gradually adding more
modules to the system without needing to build it all in at the start
— in fact, the first version of the system only output communities
without any item representations, but this by itself had many useful
applications.
3
STAGE 1: COMMUNITY DISCOVERY
This stage is about discovering communities from the Twitter user–
user graph i.e. the directed graph of Follow relationships between
users. Following seminal work in the analysis of directed graphs
such as HITS [17] and SALSA [20], we find it convenient to refor-
mulate the directed graph as a bipartite graph. We now frame our
task as one of identifying bipartite communities i.e. communities
consisting of members from left as well as right partitions, and
where the edge density between the left and right member sets is
high. The bipartite reformulation lets us more flexibly assign users
to communities — similar to HITS, we decouple the communities
a user is influential in from the communities in which a user is
interested.
Problem Definition 1. Given a bipartite user–user graph with
left-partition 𝐿and right-partition 𝑅, find 𝑘(possibly overlapping)
bipartite communities from the graph, and assign each left-node and
right-node to the communities with weights to indicate the strength
of their memberships.
The other advantage of reformulating the directed graph as a bi-
partite graph is that we can choose to make 𝑅, the right set of
nodes, different from 𝐿, the left set of nodes – in particular, since
the majority of edges in a typical social network is directed towards
a minority of users, it makes sense to pick a smaller 𝑅than 𝐿. In
Twitter’s case, we find that we’re able to cover the majority of edges
(numbering ∼1011) in the full graph by including the top ∼107 most
followed users in 𝑅, while 𝐿continues to include all users, which
is ∼109. Our problem definition also asks to assign non-negative
scores to both the left and the right members indicating the strength
of association to a community. Therefore, we represent the left and
right memberships as sparse, non-negative matrices U|𝐿|×𝑘and
V|𝑅|×𝑘, where 𝑘is the number of communities. Hence, the problem
of bipartite community discovery bears close similarities to the
problem of sparse non-negative matrix factorization (NMF). The
biggest challenge with adapting existing approaches such as NMF
and their variants [1, 3, 35] is the inability to scale them to graphs
with ∼109 nodes and ∼1011 edges – all of our attempts internally to
adapt these approaches (see e.g. [30]) have only worked at smaller
scales and have been very difficult to debug and maintain.
With SimClusters, we instead adopt the following 3-step ap-
proach, illustrated with a toy example in Figure 2.
(1) Similarity Graph of Right Nodes: We calculate the “right
projection” of the bipartite graph, i.e., we calculate the simi-
larity between the nodes in the right partition of the bipartite
graph based on their incoming edges, and we form a weighted,
undirected graph consisting only of the nodes in the right par-
tition. More details in Section 3.1.
(2) Communities of Right Nodes: We discover communities
from this similarity graph, using a novel neighborhood-based
sampling algorithm that is inspired by the work of [33] but is
much more accurate, faster, and scales to graphs with billions
of edges. More details in Section 3.2.
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
3185
u1
u2
u3
u4
v1
v2
v3
v4
v1
v2
v3
v4
v1
v2
v3
v4
1.0
0.5
0
0
c1
0
0
0.5
1.0
c2
v1
v2
v3
v4
Step 1 (Section 3.1): 
Compute Undirected, 
weighted similarity graph 
(Batch, Distributed)
Step 2 (Section 3.2): Community 
discovery and calculation of V
(Batch, Shared Memory Multi-Core)
V=
U5x2 = A5x4 . V4x2  =
u5
1.5
1.5
0
0
c1
0
0.5
1.5
1.5
c2
u1
u2
u3
u4
u5
1.5
0
Step 3 (Section 3.3): Community 
assignment to left nodes via 
calculation of U 
(Batch, Distributed)
Adjacency matrix
Final Output: U, V
Figure 2: Overview of 3-step approach to discovering bipar-
tite communities (Stage 1).
(3) Communities of Left Nodes: We now assign nodes from the
left partition to the communities discovered in step 2, and this
is described in Section 3.3.
We note that the broad outlines of this approach have been in-
dependently discovered and suggested in the past literature (see
e.g. [23, 28]), but it has been largely neglected as an option among
similar deployments in industry. The primary reason we think
this works is that while the original bipartite graph is massive
and noisy, the similarity graph of right nodes is much smaller and
has clearer community structure. From a scalability point of view,
this approach shifts most of the computational burden to the first
step of identifying pairs of similar users based on their followers,
which is a problem that is largely solved at Twitter (see Section 3.1).
From a matrix-factorization point of view, this 3-step approach
closely mirrors one way of performing SVD of a matrix A, via the
eigen-decomposition of A𝑇A.
Our 3-step approach also isolates the hard-to-parallelize step of
community discovery into step 2, where it operates on a smaller
graph that fits into the memory of a single machine, while the
other two steps operate on much bigger inputs and out of neces-
sity run in batch-distributed settings such as Hadoop MapReduce.
This approach is also modular and allows for swapping out imple-
mentations of each of the above steps independent of the others.
A possible concern with our 3-step approach is that it may lead
to reduced accuracy compared to directly learning the communi-
ties on the input bipartite network – we empirically test this in
Supplemental Section A.2 and find this not to be an issue.
3.1
Step 1: Similarity Graph of Right Nodes
The goal of this step is to construct a much smaller unipartite,
undirected graph 𝐺over the nodes of the right partition. We define
the weight between two users (𝑢, 𝑣) based on the cosine similarity
of their followers on the left side of the bipartite graph. To elaborate,
if ®𝑥𝑢and ®𝑥𝑣represent the binary incidence vectors of 𝑢’s and 𝑣’s
followers, their cosine similarity is defined as ®𝑥𝑢· ®𝑥𝑣/
p
∥®𝑥𝑢∥∥®𝑥𝑣∥.
With this definition, two users would have non-zero similarity,
or an edge in 𝐺simply by sharing one common neighbor in the
bipartite graph. In order to avoid generating an extremely dense
similarity graph, we discard the edges with similarity score lower
than a certain threshold and additionally keep at most a certain
number of neighbors with the largest similarity scores for each
user.
The difficulty is that solving the similar users problem is very
challenging at Twitter scale. But because this is a problem with
important applications – e.g. it is the foundation of applying item-
based collaborative filtering for the “Who To Follow” module [11] –
we have invested significant resources to develop a robust solution.
Our solution, called WHIMP, uses a combination of wedge sampling
and Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) to scale to the Twitter graph
and lends itself to implementation on Hadoop MapReduce [32].
WHIMP is able to identify similar users for users with either large or
small followings, and has been vetted in a variety of ways internally.
Ultimately, this similarity graph step takes as input a directed/bi-
partite graph with ∼109 nodes and ∼1011 edges and outputs an undi-
rected graph with ∼107 nodes and ∼109 edges. In other words, we
go from shared-nothing cluster-computing scale to shared-memory
multi-core scale. The transformation wrought by this step is also
reminiscent of prior research which suggested that keeping only the
most important edges in a graph can benefit community discovery
methods [29].
3.2
Step 2: Communities of Right Nodes
In this step, we wish to discover communities of densely connected
nodes from the undirected, possibly-weighted similarity graph from
the previous step. In order to accurately preserve the structure of
the input similarity graph, we have observed that it is important for
the communities to have hundreds of nodes, rather than thousands
or tens or thousands. This means that we need algorithms that can
process input graphs with ∼107 nodes and ∼109 edges to find ∼105
communities. Despite the long history of community discovery
algorithms, we were unable to find any existing solution that can
satisfy these scale requirements. We next describe the algorithm
we developed, called Neighborhood-aware Metropolis Hastings
(henceforth Neighborhood-aware MH), to meet our requirements.
Our algorithm extends a Metropolis-Hastings sampling approach
presented in [33] for discovering overlapping communities, which
we first describe as background. Let Z|𝑅|×𝑘be a sparse binary com-
munity assignments matrix and Z(𝑢) denote the set of communities
to which the vertex 𝑢has been assigned (in other words, Z(𝑢) gives
the non-zero column indices from the 𝑢-th row in Z). Equation 1
specifies an objective function over Z.
F (Z) def
= 𝛼
Õ
(𝑢,𝑣) ∈𝐸
1(|Z(𝑢) ∩Z(𝑣)| > 0)+
Õ
(𝑢,𝑣)∉𝐸
1(|Z(𝑢) ∩Z(𝑣)| = 0)
(1)
1 is the indicator function. F (Z) is the sum of two terms – the first
counts how many neighboring pairs of nodes in the graph share
at least one community, while the second counts how many non-
neighbor pairs of nodes in the graph do not share a community.2
Since most real, large-scale networks are very sparse, it is useful
to upweight the contribution of the first term using the parameter
𝛼– increasing values of 𝛼means that the objective function is
2We give details here assuming the input network is unweighted, to simplify the
exposition, but the method is easy to extend (conceptually at least) to the case where
the input graph has weights.
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
3186
Algorithm 1: Generalization of the Metropolis-Hastings
approach to community discovery from [33]
1: Input: Graph G, desired communities 𝑘, hyper-parameter 𝑇
2:
Z ←Initialize(𝐺,𝑘)
3:
for 𝑡←1 to 𝑇epochs do
4:
for 𝑢←randomShuffle(1 . . . |𝑉|) do
5:
Z′(𝑢) ←Proposal(𝑢,𝐺, Z,𝑘)
6:
𝑝←𝑚𝑖𝑛(1,𝑒𝑓(𝑢,Z′)−𝑓(𝑢,Z)) // 𝑝is 1 iff
𝑓(𝑢, Z′) > 𝑓(𝑢, Z)
7:
With probability 𝑝, accept Z′(𝑢) i.e. set Z(𝑢) ←Z′(𝑢)
8:
end for
9:
end for
10: return Z
Algorithm 2: Initialize and Proposal functions for Random
MH [33]
1: Function: Initialize(𝐺,𝑘)
2: return |𝑉| × 𝑘binary matrix where each row is a uniformly
random sample from the 2𝑘space of length-𝑘binary vectors
3:
4: Function: Proposal(𝑢,𝐺, Z,𝑘)
5: return uniformly random sample from 2𝑘space of length-𝑘
binary vectors
better optimized by Z with more non-zeros. Note also that the
objective function above is decomposable, in the sense that the
overall objective function F (Z) can be expressed as a sum of a
function 𝑓(𝑢, Z) over individual vertices (below, N (𝑢) denotes the
set of neighbors of vertex 𝑢).
𝑓(𝑢, Z) def
= 𝛼
Õ
𝑣∈N(𝑢)
1(|Z(𝑢) ∩Z(𝑣)| > 0)+
Õ
𝑣∉N(𝑢)
1(|Z(𝑢) ∩Z(𝑣)| = 0)
(2)
Using the above background, we first describe the approach for
discovering overlapping communities in a general way in Algo-
rithm 1. After initializing Z, we run at most 𝑇epochs of optimiza-
tion, where in each epoch we iterate over all the vertices in the
graph in a shuffled order. For each vertex 𝑢we sample a new set
of community assignments Z′(𝑢) using the proposal function, and
calculate the difference in objective function between the newly
proposed Z′(𝑢) and the current set of community assignments Z(𝑢).
If Z′(𝑢) is better, then it is accepted; if not, it may still be accepted
with a certain probability, indicated in line 6 of Algorithm 1. As
noted in [33], one reason for preferring a randomized optimization
procedure as opposed a deterministic optimization procedure is to
avoid getting stuck in local minima.
The specific choices for the ‘Initialize’ and ‘Proposal’ functions
made in [33] are described in Algorithm 2. Because these func-
tions are implemented using purely random sampling, we refer to
this approach as ‘Random MH’. The main practical drawback of
Random MH is that it is extremely slow to obtain a satisfactorily
accurate solution for even moderate values of 𝑘. This is not surpris-
ing considering that in each step, the proposal function generates a
completely random community assignments vector and evaluates
Algorithm 3: Initialize and Proposal functions for
Neighborhood-aware MH
1: Function: Initialize(𝐺,𝑘)
2:
for 𝑖←1..𝑘do
3:
Set 𝑖𝑡ℎcolumn of Z as neighbors of a randomly picked
node
4:
end for
5: return Z
6:
7: Function: Proposal(𝑢,𝐺, Z,𝑘,𝑙) // 𝑙<< 𝑘
8:
𝑆←columns of Z with ≥1 non-zero in rows of 𝑁(𝑢)
// enumerateSubsets(𝑆,𝑙) returns all subsets of 𝑆of size ≤𝑙
9:
for 𝑠←enumerateSubsets(𝑆,𝑙) do
10:
fMap(𝑠) ←𝑓(𝑢,𝑠) // Per Eqn 2
11:
end for
12: return Sample 𝑠from 𝑆according to softmax(fMap)
it w.r.t. the current vector; as 𝑘increases, the space of community
assignments increases exponentially which makes it very unlikely
that the proposal will be able to generate an acceptable transition.
Instead, we propose Neighborhood-aware MH, specified in Algo-
rithm 3. The proposal function in Neighborhood-aware MH is based
on two insights or assumptions – the first is that it is extremely
unlikely that a node should belong to a community that none of its
neighbors currently belongs to; the second is that for most practical
applications, it is unnecessary to assign a node to more than a small
number of communities. We design a two-step proposal function
that works as follows. In the first step, for a given node 𝑢we iterate
over all the neighbors of 𝑢, look up their community assignments
in Z, and identify the set of communities which are represented at
least once, call it 𝑆. In the second step, we iterate over all subsets of
size ≤𝑙of 𝑆from the first step, where 𝑙is a user-provided upper
bound on how many communities a node can be assigned to. For
each subset 𝑠, we calculate the function 𝑓(𝑢,𝑠) from Eqn 2, and
finally sample the subset 𝑠with probability proportional to 𝑒𝑓(𝑢,𝑠)
i.e. we apply the softmax. The result of the sampling is then either
accepted or rejected, as specified in lines 6 and 7 of Algorithm 1. As
for initializing Z, we seed each community with the neighborhood
for a randomly selected node in the graph.
We discuss a few important implementation details.
• Most of the complexity comes from evaluating the function
𝑓(𝑢,𝑠), which requires calculating the intersection between a
node’s neighbors and the union of the communities in 𝑠. For
many members of 𝑆(the set computed in line 8 Algorithm 3), we
can incrementally compute the summary statistics required for
𝑓(𝑢,𝑠) as we go through a node’s neighborhood when executing
line 8 of Algorithm 3, so that the subsequent inner loop in line 10
can execute much faster. Similarly, the acceptance probability for
line 6 of Algorithm 1 can also reuse the 𝑓(𝑢, Z) computed during
the proposal process.
• Sampling from a softmax distribution can be accomplished effi-
ciently in a single pass using the Gumbel-Max trick.3
3http://timvieira.github.io/blog/post/2014/07/31/gumbel-max-trick/
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
3187
• In the important special case where we assign each node to at
most one community only, each epoch of Neighborhood-aware
MH can execute in 𝑂(|𝐸|) time, using both of the above men-
tioned tricks.
• The algorithm lends itself well to parallelization. Specifically
the for loop in line 4 of Algorithm 1 can be distributed among
several threads which share access to Z, the rows of which can
optionally be synchronized using read-write locks. In practice,
we have found that removing synchronization has no effect on
the accuracy and gives a slight boost in speed (similar to [24]).
3.3
Step 3: Communities of Left Nodes
The output of the previous step is the matrix V|𝑅|×𝑘in which the 𝑖-
th row specifies the communities to which the right-node 𝑖has been
assigned. The remaining problem that needs to be solved is coming
up with the matrix U|𝐿|×𝑘such that the 𝑖-th row specifies the
communities to which the left-node 𝑖has been assigned. A simple
way to do this assignment is to assign a left-node to communities
by looking at the communities that its neighbors (which will all
be right-nodes, and hence already have assignments) have been
assigned to. More formally, if A|𝐿|×|𝑅| is the adjacency matrix of
the input bipartite graph, then we set U = 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒(A · V), where
the 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒function keeps only up to a certain number of non-
zeros per row to save on storage. This equation for calculating
U is motivated by the fact that in the special case when V is an
orthonormal matrix, i.e. V𝑇V = 𝐼, then U = A · V is the solution to
A = U · V𝑇. We have experimented with situations both where V
is orthonormal (this can be achieved by assigning each right-node
to at most one community) as well as situations where V is not,
and have found that in each case the resulting U provides accurate
representations for the left-nodes. We refer to U as User Interest
Representations, and it forms the main input for subsequent steps.
The computation in this step can be scaled to our requirements
easily by implementing in a batch-distributed computing paradigm
such as Hadoop MapReduce.
4
STAGE 2: ITEM REPRESENTATIONS
In this section, we describe how to compute representations for
different items, such as Tweets, Hashtags, or users - which can be
the targets for different recommendation problems. Along with the
user interest representations U from Stage 1, this stage also relies
on a user–item bipartite graph that is formed from historical or
on-going user engagements with those items on the platform.
Our general framework is to compute an item’s representation
by aggregating the representations of all the users who engaged
with it, i.e., the representation for item 𝑗is
W(𝑗) = 𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒({U(𝑢), ∀𝑢∈N (𝑗)}),
(3)
where N (𝑗) denotes all the users who engaged with item 𝑗in the
corresponding user–item bipartite graph, and W(𝑗) and U(𝑢) are
both vectors. The 𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒function can be chosen based on differ-
ent applications, and can also be learned from a specific supervised
task [13]. In our case, we opt for a relatively simple, interpretable
𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒function with the goal that W(𝑗,𝑐) can be interpreted as
the level of interest an average user of the community 𝑐currently
has in this item 𝑗. We choose to use “exponentially time-decayed
Algorithm 4: Updating item representations in streaming
setting
1: Input:
• Parameter ℎ𝑎𝑙𝑓_𝑙𝑖𝑓𝑒for the exponential decay,
• edge (𝑢, 𝑗,𝑡) indicating user 𝑢engaged with item 𝑗at time 𝑡,
• User Interest representations U
2: Input and Output:
• Distributed cache W where keys are pairs of (item,
community) and values are (last_value, last_time),
• Distributed cache R where keys are items and values are
top communities and their scores (with last_time),
• Distributed cache C where keys are communities and
values are top items and their scores (with last_time).
3: for 𝑐←community ids of U(𝑢) with nonzero values do
4:
(𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡_𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒,𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡_𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒) ←W(𝑗,𝑐)
5:
𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑦_𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟←2−(𝑡−𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡_𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒)/ℎ𝑎𝑙𝑓_𝑙𝑖𝑓𝑒
6:
𝑛𝑒𝑤_𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒←𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑦_𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟× 𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡_𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒+ 1
7:
W(𝑗,𝑐) ←(𝑛𝑒𝑤_𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒,𝑡)
8:
R(𝑗) ←𝑢𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑇𝑜𝑝𝐾(R(𝑗), W(𝑗,𝑐)) // update the top
communities and their scores (and last_time) based on the
updated W(𝑗,𝑐)
9:
C(𝑐) ←𝑢𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑇𝑜𝑝𝐾(C(𝑐), W(𝑗,𝑐)) // update the top items
and their scores (and last_time) based on the updated W(𝑗,𝑐)
10: end for
average” as our 𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒function, which exponentially decays
the contribution of a user who interacted with the item based on
how long ago that user engaged with the item. The half-life used
for the exponential decay is item-dependent – where the shelf-life
of those items is longer (such as Topics), we set longer half-lives,
while for shorter shelf life items such as Tweets, we set shorter
half-lives.
The resulting matrix W is much denser than U and it is not
useful to save all its non-zero values at scale. Instead, we maintain
two additional views or indexes of W, each of which keeps a top-k
view. The first view is R and R(𝑗) tracks the top communities for
the item 𝑗. The second view is C and C(𝑐) tracks the top items for
the community 𝑐. In the case of items with a long shelf life, the
calculation of W, R, and C is straightforwardly done in a batch
setting using e.g. Hadoop MapReduce.
However, handling items with short shelf life is more interest-
ing. In this case, we realize a major advantage of an exponentially
time-decayed average (as opposed to e.g. time-windowed average),
which is that it lends itself to easy incremental updates for W.
Specifically, we just need to keep two summary statistics for each
cell in W - the current average itself and the last timestamp when
it was updated. As detailed in Algorithm 4 lines 4–7, when a new
user–item engagement arrives, we are able to update W for the
item by calculating a decay factor based on the time elapsed since
the last update. In order to exactly track the row-wise and column-
wise top-k views on W, it is necessary that we track the entirety
of W - if it turns out that W is too big to be tracked in its entirety,
then one can use sketches to keep a summary of W at the cost of
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
3188
introducing errors [4, 15], although we have found this unneces-
sary. Another way of reducing the size of W is to reduce 𝑘i.e. the
dimensionality of the representations computed in Stage 1, or by
further sparsifying the input user representations U. Calculating
streaming item representations in this manner can be implemented
using frameworks such as Apache Storm/Heron/Spark/Flink.
The two top-k views R and C are stored in low-latency key-value
stores. Using these two indices, it easy to retrieve nearest neighbors
for any user or item – we simply look up the top communities
that a user or item is active in, and for each of those communities,
identify the top users or items. These candidates can then be ranked
by fetching their full representations and computing the similarity
with the representation of the query object (either user or item).
The upshot is that we neither need to brute-force scan through all
users/items nor need to build specialized nearest neighbor indices.
5
DEPLOYMENT DETAILS
SimClusters has been deployed in production at Twitter for more
than an year so far. All the representations output by the Sim-
Clusters system are also keyed by model-version, so that we can
operate multiple models in parallel to enable the trying out of new
parameters or code changes without affecting existing production.
The main model that is currently running in production has ∼105
communities in the representations, discovered from the similarity
graph of the top ∼107 users by follower count. The bipartite com-
munities discovered by the model contain nearly 70% of the edges
in the input bipartite graph, suggesting that most of the structure of
the graph is captured. The right member sets do not vary too much
in their sizes, while the left member sets vary drastically, reflecting
the variance in the original follower distribution. Within Stage 1,
Step 1 (similarity calculation) is the most expensive step, taking
about 2 days to run end-to-end on Hadoop MapReduce, but note
that this job was in production before SimClusters and therefore is
not an additional cost introduced by SimClusters. Step 2 was run
from scratch for the very first time when SimClusters launched;
subsequently, we update the V matrix to take into account changes
to the user–user similarity graph by running an abbreviated version
of Neighborhood-aware MH initialized with the current V. Step 3
is also periodically run as batch application on Hadoop MapReduce
using the latest version of the user–user graph and the latest V
from Step 2. Once we have the output from Step 3 (the U matrix),
we do not directly use the V matrix anymore, which is typically too
sparse for accurate modeling.
For Stage 2, we currently have four jobs – two batch jobs, one for
“user influence” representations and one for Topic representations;
and two streaming jobs, one for Tweet representations and one for
Trend representations. The purpose of the user influence represen-
tations is to tell us what communities a user is influential in, as
opposed to the user interest representations (the output of Stage
1) which tell us what communities a user is interested in, The user
influence representations are better than the original original V
matrix for this purpose as they cover many more users and are also
denser for the original subset of users. Topic representations tell us
which communities are the most interested in a Topic, and the input
to computing these is both the user interest representations as well
as a user–Topic engagement graph. Tweet and Trend representa-
tions are computed and updated in a streaming job which takes
as input user–Tweet engagements happening in real-time. Both
the user interest and user influence representations are protected
using authentication to only allow authorized access, and users
are provided the chance to opt out of unwanted inferences in their
Privacy dashboard.
Note that we store only the non-zeros in all our representations,
and in all cases we truncate entries close to zero. The user interest
representations cover ∼109 users while the user influence repre-
sentations cover ∼108 users, with both representations having on
average 10−100 non-zeros. There are fewer recommendable Tweets
and Trends at any given point in time (refer Table 1), but their rep-
resentations are denser, having on average ∼102 non-zeros. Note
that for the following four representations - user influence, Topic,
Tweet, and Trend - we also maintain the inverted indices, i.e. given
a community, what are the top-k users/Topics/Tweets/Trends for
that community (denoted by C in Section 4). Having C is essential
to retrieving the items whose representation has the largest dot
product or cosine similarity with another representation.
6
APPLICATIONS
6.1
Similar Tweets on Tweet Details page
For users who visit a Tweet via an email or a push notification,
Twitter shows a module with other recommended Tweets, along-
side replies. Prior to SimClusters, this module retrieved Tweets
solely based on author similarity i.e. Tweets written by users who
share a lot of followers with the author of the main Tweet on the
page. We ran an online A/B test where we added similar Tweets
from SimClusters i.e. we retrieved Tweets whose SimClusters rep-
resentation has high cosine similarity with the representation of
the main Tweet on the page. We found that the engagement rate
on the resulting Tweets was 25% higher.4
Subsequently, we added a second candidate source for this prod-
uct based on SimClusters – retrieve Tweets whose SimClusters
representation have high cosine similarity with the user influence
representation of the author of the main Tweet on the page. Adding
this source increases the coverage further, while the overall increase
in engagement rate is a more modest but still impressive 7%.
6.2
Tweet Recommendations in Home Page
A user’s Home feed on Twitter consists of both Tweets from users
being directly followed as well as recommended Tweets from users
not being followed (“Out of Network Tweets”). Prior to SimClus-
ters, the main algorithm for recommended Tweets was what is
called “Network Activity” - namely, use GraphJet [31] to identify
which Tweets are being liked by the viewing user’s followings (i.e.
network).
Using SimClusters Tweet representations, we built two candi-
date sources to supplement Network Activity Tweets. The first
candidate source identifies Tweets whose real-time representation
has the highest dot-product with the viewing user’s interest rep-
resentation. The second candidate source is based on item-based
collaborative filtering, and uses the same underlying implementa-
tion as the “Similar Tweets” application described in Section 6.1 to
identify Tweets similar to those Tweets which have been recently
4All the reported percentage changes in this section are statistically significant per
our internal A/B testing tool.
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
3189
liked by the user. We ran an online A/B test by replacing existing
candidates in production (in certain positions on Home) using the
candidates from these two new candidate sources. The experiment
showed that the engagement rate of the new candidates is 33%
higher than that for candidates generated by Network Activity, and
shown in similar positions. The two candidate sources together
were able to increase total weighted engagements on the platform
by close to 1%, which is very large considering the maturity of this
product and that recommended Tweets only account for a minority
of the viewed content in Home pages.
Apart from new candidates, we also use the user interest and
Tweet representations to improve the ranking of candidates com-
ing from all sources. The user and item representations are used
to enrich the set of existing user features, item features, as well as
user-item interaction features in the input to an engagement predic-
tion model. A/B testing showed that the model trained with these
features was able to increase engagement rate of recommended
content by 4.7% relatively, which is a significant lift for a mature
model.
6.3
Ranking of Personalized Trends
Showing top trending content (e.g., Hashtags, Events, breaking
news) is an important way to keep users informed about what is
happening locally and globally. The implementation for Trends fol-
lows a two-stage process of Trends detection followed by ranking.
Prior to SimClusters, the ranking of a Trend primarily depended on
its volume and a small number of personalization features. We used
Trends SimClusters representations to score Trends for a given user
by using the dot-product of the user’s interest representation along
with the real-time representation for a Trend. A/B testing revealed
that using these scores led to a 8% increase in user engagement
with the Trends themselves, as well as a bigger 12% increase in
engagement on the landing page subsequent to a click. These im-
provements are large when compared against other experiments
run on this product.
6.4
Topic Tweet Recommendations
Given a Topic in a pre-defined topic taxonomy such as “Fashion”
or “Marvel Movies”, how can we identify the best content about it?
The original implementation here (before the product was launched
publicly) primarily relied on custom text matching rules curated
by human experts to identify topical Tweets. Once we realized
that this approach surfaced a number of false positives (primarily
due to a Tweet’s text incidentally matching the rules for a Topic),
we tested a second implementation where we first identify those
Tweets whose SimClusters representation has high cosine similarity
with the representation of the query Topic, and then apply the
textual matching rules. Internal evaluation showed that the second
approach returned much better results, therefore we launched this
product publicly using this approach. Since launch, this feature
has received positive press externally as well as causing higher
engagement with Tweets from the broader user base.
6.5
Ranking Who To Follow Recommendations
The candidates for Who To Follow recommendations are ranked
using an engagement prediction model, to which we added new
features based on the SimClusters representations of the viewing
user and the candidate user. In A/B tests, we observed an impressive
increase of 7% in the follow rate by using these new features.
6.6
Applications in progress
6.6.1
Notifications quality filter. A crucial task on Twitter is to
protect users from getting abusive or spammy replies or mentions.
We developed new SimClusters representations for users based on
the user–user block graph (i.e. when one user blocks another), and
used these representations as features to train a model for filtering
out abusive and spammy replies. In offline tests, the model showed
an impressive 4% lift in PR-AUC5.
6.6.2
Supervised embeddings from feature combinations.
While SimClusters representations mostly capture information
from various engagement graphs, we are also experimenting ap-
proaches to combine it with other features about users or items
(for example, follower counts or geo information). One approach
where we are obtaining promising early results is to train a deep
neural network on an ancillary prediction task (such as engage-
ment prediction) where the input features are both the user and
item SimClusters representations along with previously developed
features for the user and item. By choosing the right architecture
for this neural net, for example, the two-tower DNN model [36], we
are able to learn dense embeddings separately for users and items.
6.6.3
Real-time Event notifications. A major application at
Twitter is to notify users who may be interested when a major
news event happens. Using the SimClusters representation of an
Event (which is in turn derived by aggregating the representations
of the human-curated Tweets about it), we can identify the com-
munities of users who will be interested in it, and subsequently
target users interested in them. We are currently evaluating such
an approach.
7
RELATED WORK
Traditionally, approaches to recommender systems are categorized
as either neighborhood-based (which do not involve model-fitting),
or model-based (which fit a model to the input data).
In our experience of building recommendations at Twitter, we
find that neighborhood-based methods are easier to scale, more
accurate, more interpretable, and also more flexible in terms of ac-
commodating new users and/or items [9, 11, 12, 31]. Recent research
has also found that well-tuned neighborhood-based methods are
not easy to beat in terms of accuracy [6]. However, neighborhood-
based approaches do not provide a general solution – we needed
to build and maintain separate systems to solve each recommen-
dation sub-problems at Twitter in the past (see Section 1 for more
discussion of our past work).
Model-based approaches, such as factorized models [18], graph
embedding [10, 26] or VAE [22], fit separate parameters for each
user or item. The number of model parameters that need to be
learned in order to scale to a billion-user social network can easily
approach 1012, necessitating unprecedentedly large systems for
solving ML problems at that scale. Hybrid models, such as Factor-
ization Machine [27] and Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [5] have
been introduced to reduce the parameter space by utilizing the side
information as prior knowledge for users and items. However, they
5Area Under Curve for Precision-Recall, a metric for classifiers
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
3190
require either well-defined feature vectors or pre-trained embed-
d