TwinBERT: Distilling Knowledge to Twin-Structured BERT
Models for Eﬀicient Retrieval
Wenhao Lu
Bing Ads of AI & Research Group
Microsof
One Microsof Way
Redmond, WA 98052-6399
wenhlu@microsof.com
Jian Jiao
Bing Ads of AI & Research Group
Microsof
One Microsof Way
Redmond, WA 98052-6399
jiajia@microsof.com
Ruofei Zhang
Bing Ads of AI & Research Group
Microsof
One Microsof Way
Redmond, WA 98052-6399
bzhang@microsof.com
ABSTRACT
Pre-trained language models like BERT have achieved great success
in a wide variety of NLP tasks, while the superior performance
comes with high demand in computational resources, which hin-
ders the application in low-latency IR systems. We present Twin-
BERT model for eﬀective and eﬃcient retrieval, which has twin-
structured BERT-like encoders to represent query and document
respectively and a crossing layer to combine the embeddings and
produce a similarity score. Diﬀerent from BERT, where the two
input sentences are concatenated and encoded together, TwinBERT
decouples them during encoding and produces the embeddings
for query and document independently, which allows document
embeddings to be pre-computed oﬄine and cached in memory.
Tereupon, the computation lef for run-time is from the query
encoding and query-document crossing only. Tis single change
can save large amount of computation time and resources, and
therefore signiﬁcantly improve serving eﬃciency. Moreover, a few
well-designed network layers and training strategies are proposed
to further reduce computational cost while at the same time keep
the performance as remarkable as BERT model. Lastly, we develop
two versions of TwinBERT for retrieval and relevance tasks corre-
spondingly, and both of them achieve close or on-par performance
to BERT-Base model.
Te model was trained following the teacher-student framework
and evaluated with data from one of the major search engines. Ex-
perimental results showed that the inference time was signiﬁcantly
reduced and was ﬁrstly controlled around 20ms on CPUs while at
the same time the performance gain from ﬁne-tuned BERT-Base
model was mostly retained. Integration of the models into pro-
duction systems also demonstrated remarkable improvements on
relevance metrics with negligible inﬂuence on latency.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Massively parallel algorithms;
Machine learning algorithms; Supervised learning; Neural
networks; Learning latent representations; •Information sys-
tems →Document representation; Qery representation; Spon-
sored search advertising;
KEYWORDS
Deep Learning; Deep Neural Network (DNN); Semantic Embedding;
Information Retrieval; k-NN; CDSSM; PyTorch; Sponsored Search;
BERT; Knowledge Distillation
1
INTRODUCTION
Pre-trained language models such as BERT [6] and GPT [25] have
led a series of breakthroughs in a broad variety of NLP tasks in-
cluding question answering, natural language inference, sentiment
classiﬁcation and others, and more impressively, they even sur-
passed human performance on some of them 1. However, to serve
these deep-structured models in a production system, besides accu-
racy, latency is also an important factor to consider. A BERT-Base
model, for instance, has 110 million parameters and 12 stacked
multi-head atention networks, which is extremely computation-
ally intensive and makes it challenging to deploy such a model in a
real-world system.
In the age of information explosion, to meet people’s informa-
tion needs, a variety of modern applications have been developed
including web search, online advertising, product recommendation,
digital assistant and personalized feed. At the heart of these sys-
tems, information retrieval (IR) plays an important role in handling
the increasingly growing volume of information. Te quality of an
IR system crucially depends on the deep understanding of queries
and documents, which fundamentally is an NLP problem and could
beneﬁt from the state-of-the-art pre-trained models. However, con-
sidering the large-scale and low-latency nature of IR systems, the
long inference time of these models becomes a botleneck for their
applications in the area. Most of the prior knowledge distillation
eﬀorts on BERT [13], [22], [30], [31] showed eﬀectiveness in com-
pressing the complex models and reducing the inference time to a
certain degree. Nevertheless, few of them could meet the latency
requirement of IR systems.
To address the latency problem brought by the advanced NLP
techniques, this paper proposes a novel language representation
model for eﬃcient retrieval, called TwinBERT. Te model has twin-
structured BERT-like encoders to encode the query and document
respectively and a crossing layer to combine the two embeddings
and produce a similarity score. Te model was evaluated using data
collected from one of the major search engines and the accuracy
performance is close to a complex BERT-Base model. More impor-
tantly, the implementation with PyTorch, although not as eﬃcient
as C/C++ and others, showed considerable reduction in inference
time, and the average time cost on CPU over 1,000 random queries
was only around 20 milliseconds for scoring 100 documents.
Our contributions are summarized as below. 1) a twin-BERT
structure which separates BERT inputs when encoding and allows
embeddings to be pre-computed 2) an eﬃcient retrieval model based
on cosine similarity supporting ANN search 3) an eﬃcient relevance
1htps://gluebenchmark.com/leaderboard/
arXiv:2002.06275v1  [cs.IR]  14 Feb 2020
prediction model based on residual network with performance close
to BERT-Base.
Te rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents
a literature review on related works. Section 3 brieﬂy introduces
the context of paid search. Section 4 discusses details of TwinBERT
including network architecture, model training and online serving.
Section 5 reports the experimental results of TwinBERT compared
to baseline models. Section 6 introduces how TwinBERT is deployed
and used in production system. In the end, Section 7 concludes the
work and lists future directions to explore.
2
RELATED WORK
Learning Representations through Language Models
Language representations, as the building blocks of NLP models,
are impressively eﬀective in improving model performance on NLP
tasks, and therefore have become an important research area over
the years. According to how the representations are employed in
downstream tasks, prior works in the area can be broadly grouped
into two categories: feature-based approaches and ﬁne-tuning ap-
proaches. Word representations, sentence-based representations,
and most recently contextual word representations are three direc-
tions of the feature-based representations. Word2Vec [21], GloVe
[23] and FastText [1] focus on learning word representations and
diﬀerent senses of a word are all combined into one vector while
Skip-thought [15], FastSent [10], Qick-thought [20], Universal sen-
tence encoder [3] and other works [4], [29] extract sentence-level
representations. Unlike the previous works, ELMo [24] derives
word representation based on the entire sentence and captures
representations of words on multiple granularity by combining
vectors from intermediate layers of a multi-layer BiLSTM. All these
methods only require one round of training before used in any
downstream tasks. In recent two years, pre-trained models such
as GPT [25] and BERT [6] demonstrated superior performance. In
contrast to previous works, the representations from these models
are learned in two phases. In the ﬁrst phase, a language model is
learned in an unsupervised manner. In the second phase, the model
is ﬁne-tuned with task-speciﬁc label data to produce representa-
tions used in downstream tasks.
BERT stands for bidirectional encoder representations from
transformers and achieved the state-of-the-art performance on a
broad variety of NLP tasks. BERT is pre-trained on a large corpus of
unlabelled text data including the entire Wikipedia and BooksCor-
pus [41]. It has two pre-training tasks: masked language model
(MLM) and next sentence prediction (NSP). MLM enforces the model
to learn parameters by optimizing the prediction of masked tokens.
To beter serve the downstream binary classiﬁcation tasks such as
question answering (QA) and natural language inference (NLI), NSP
is introduced to jointly train with MLM, which requires a pair of
sentences as input. Trough the multi-layer bidirectional structure,
tokens from the two sentences deeply interact with each other and
as a result, model performance is eﬀectively improved for binary
classiﬁcation tasks. As a side eﬀect, the computational cost is also
highly increased, especially in the area of information retrieval,
where one query needs to be paired with a large number of docu-
ment candidates. BERT has overwhelming inﬂuence and to extend
the work, a few variants have been developed including MTDNN
[18], XLNet [37], ERNIE [39], RoBERTa [19], ALBERT [16] and T5
[26].
Distilling Knowledge to Compact Models
With limited computational resources and strict latency require-
ment, expensive models such as BERT normally cannot be directly
deployed in real-world applications, and knowledge distillation
(KD) [2],[11] is typically adopted to address the issue. Te idea is to
transfer the knowledge learnt from an expensive high-performance
teacher model to a compact student model without signiﬁcant per-
formance loss. In contrast to traditional machine learning tasks,
a loss function is deﬁned on sofen probabilities produced by the
teacher model instead of hard labels, which are so-called sof la-
bels, and sof labels supposedly have higher entropy which could
provide more information and less variance. Prior eﬀorts in KD on
deep-structured models like BERT mainly focused on the transfer
techniques. [31] augmented the training data for distillation with
synthetic examples. BERT-PKD [30] learned distilled knowledge
from intermediate layers besides the output layer. [32] demon-
strated pre-trained student had beter performance than random
initialization. TinyBERT [13] further expanded distillation to trans-
former layers. [22] proposed teacher assistant to bridge the gap
between student and teacher. MT-DNN ensemble [17], [40] and
MKDN [38] improved the student model performance via learning
from multiple teachers.
To the best of our knowledge, none of these works have at-
tempted to decouple the two-sentence input, which could therefore
reduce the inference time complexity for two-input cases from
quadratic to linear time complexity.
3
SPONSORED SEARCH
TwinBERT is developed in the context of sponsored search. Readers
can refer to [7] for a comprehensive introduction of the topic. In
short, sponsored search engine delivers ads alongside the organic
search results. Tere are ofen three parties involved in the spon-
sored search ecosystem: the user, the advertiser and the search
platform. Te goal of the platform is to display a list of ads that
best match user’s intent. Below is the minimum set of key concepts
for discussions that follow.
Qery: A short text string that contains user’s intent. Users
enter queries in a search box to look for related informa-
tion.
Keyword: A short text string that expresses advertiser’s in-
tent. Keywords are provided by advertisers and are not
visible to end users but they are pivotal in that search
engine relies on them to match user intents.
Impression: An ad being displayed to the end user, on the
result page of the search engine.
On the backend of a paid search engine, the number of keywords
created by advertisers are typically at the scale of billions. Fast IR
techniques are ﬁrstly applied to reduce the number of keywords
to a much smaller matched subset and then sent to downstream
components, where more complex and less eﬃcient algorithms are
used to ﬁnalize the ads to display.
To be consistent with the above context, keywords are used
instead of documents throughout the paper.
2
Query
Token Embedding
Pooling Layer
x L
Crossing Layer
Keyword
Multi-Head 
Self-Attention 
Add & Norm
Feed Forward
Add & Norm
Token Embedding
Pooling Layer
Add & Norm
Feed Forward
Add & Norm
x L
Output
Multi-Head 
Self-Attention 
+
+
Position 
Embedding
Position 
Embedding
Figure 1: TwinBERT Architecture
4
TWINBERT
Te architecture of TwinBERT is presented in this section with a
few well-designed network layers to balance the eﬀectiveness and
eﬃciency. Other topics including model training and online serving
are also discussed in detail.
4.1
Model Architecture
As shown in Figure 1, the architecture of TwinBERT consists of two
multi-layer transformer encoders and a crossing layer to combine
the vector outputs of encoders and produce the ﬁnal output. It is
noteworthy that the parameters of the two encoders of query and
keyword could be shared or diﬀerent. Te detailed comparison of
the two styles is discussed in Section 5.
Similar to BERT model architecture, at the botom of each en-
coder is the embedding layer, where the query and keyword sen-
tences are represented separately as embeddings and then fed into
corresponding encoders. Te middle part of each encoder is a stack
of transformer encoders with the same implementation as described
in [33] but a diﬀerent seting. Following the notations in BERT,
the number of layers is denoted as L, the hidden size is H, and the
number of self-atention heads is A. In this work, the performance
is mainly reported with the following model seting: L = 6, H = 512
and A = 8 (the size of the feed-forward intermediate layer is also set
to equal to H). Te last and top layer of the encoder is the weighted
pooling layer which applies a weighted sum of the ﬁnal hidden
vectors and produces a single embedding for each input sentence.
4.2
Input Representation
In TwinBERT, the two input sentences are decoupled and encoded
separately, with each encoder only taking care of one single sen-
tence. Diﬀerent from BERT, there is no need to introduce a separator
token [SEP] to separate the two segments and the input sequence
length is roughly reduced by half. According to [33], the per-layer
complexity of self-atention is O(n2) on sequence length and other
operations are O(n). As a result of the cut on sequence length,
the overall inference cost is correspondingly decreased. Te other
classiﬁcation token [CLS] in BERT is dropped in weighted-average
pooling while reserved only in classiﬁcation token pooling, which
will be discussed in the pooling layer section.
For token embeddings, TwinBERT uses the tri-leter based word
embeddings introduced in [28]. Compared to the 30K dimensional
WordPiece embeddings [36] in BERT, tri-leter based embeddings
have larger vocabulary size (50K), and therefore can bear more
information for beter performance. On the other hand, they are
more eﬃcient when extracted at inference time since the extrac-
tion of each token is independent, while WordPiece extraction is a
recursive process.
BERT embeddings are combinations of three components: to-
ken embeddings, segment embeddings and position embeddings.
While, the input of a TwinBERT encoder only contains one single
sentence and segment embeddings are unnecessary. Terefore, the
input embeddings only consist of the sum of token embeddings and
position embeddings.
4.3
Pooling Layer
Te output of the encoder is a sequence of vectors, each correspond-
ing to an input token with position information implied from its
index in the input sentence. To provide a unique ﬁx-length vector
representation for both inputs, a pooling layer is added to provide
a robust approach to unify all token vectors into a single sentence
level embedding. Speciﬁcally, two pooling methods are experi-
mented: weighted-average pooling and classiﬁcation token pooling.
Compared to standard average pooing, weighted-average pool-
ing introduces a weight to each token vector and the output is
the weighted-average of all token vectors. Te weight parameters
are learned as part of the entire network. Te second method is
inspired by the special classiﬁcation token ([CLS]) in BERT and
is so called classiﬁcation token pooling. Te implementation
involves preﬁxing the sequence with [CLS] at the input layer. Te
output of encoder is simply the ﬁnal hidden vector of [CLS]. Com-
parison results of the two methods are presented in the experiment
section.
4.4
Crossing Layer
Given the sentence embeddings of query and keyword, here comes
the question: how to combine the two? Two versions of TwinBERT
are proposed to address the problem, denoted as TwinBERTcos and
TwinBERTres respectively:
Cosine similarity
Cosine similarity is an intuitive approach
for combining two vectors of the same length. Formally, cosine
3
similarity is deﬁned as
cos(q, k) =
q · k
∥q∥· ∥k∥
(1)
, where q and k correspond to the embedding vectors of query and
keyword. Te output falls in the range of [−1, 1], while the sof
targets from teacher model are between 0 and 1. In order to align
the two, an additional logistic regression layer is applied to the
cosine similarity score and convert it to [0, 1].
Cosine similarity projects the two embeddings to the same vector
space, and when both vectors are normalized, it can be easily trans-
formed into Euclidean distance. Tereupon, approximate nearest
neighbor (ANN) algorithms can be naturally applied for retrieval
tasks [12].
Residual network
Residual networks were ﬁrstly proposed in
[9] to solve the image recognition problem. Inspired by [27], where
residual layers were used in a non-convolutional network in the
NLP domain, they are adopted here to overcome over-ﬁting and
gradient vanishing problems. Speciﬁcally, the embeddings of query
and keyword are ﬁrst combined by a max operator and then fed
into the residual connection. Te formal deﬁnition for residual
function is as follows:
y = F (x,W ,b) + x
(2)
, where x is the max of query vector q and keyword vector k and F is
the mapping function from x to the residual with parametersW and
b. Using concatenation instead of max operator is another option.
Here, the motivation behind choosing max over concatenation is
that it provides a down-sampling eﬀect and also sofly maps the
two embeddings to a closer vector space.
Similarly, a logistic regression layer is applied to the output
vector of residual function y to predict the binary relevance label.
Compared to cosine similarity, the deep-structured network could
model more complex problems and therefore produce beter per-
formance, but as a tradeoﬀ, it is less eﬃcient in computation and
cannot easily work with the ANN algorithms.
4.5
Knowledge Distillation
TwinBERT is trained following the teacher-student framework via
knowledge distillation since comparing to learning from scratch,
student models usually have beter performance [11]. For simplicity,
Google’s 12-layer BERT-Base model is ﬁne-tuned using editorial
query-keyword relevance labels as the teacher model and is then
used to score a collection of impressed query-keyword pairs. Te
logits z are outputed to generate sof labels using the following
equation
yi =
exp(zi/T)
Í
j exp(zj/T)
, where T is the temperature parameter controlling sofness of the
labels. When T = 1, it is equivalent to standard sofmax function.
As T grows, the target values become sofer and hence provide
more information. Speciﬁcally, in TwinBERT, T is set to 2.
Te cross-entropy loss function for binary classiﬁcation is de-
ﬁned as
loss = −
N
Õ
i=1
(yi log(pi) + (1 −yi) log(1 −pi))
Online
Offline
Query 
Representation
Keyword 
Representation
Keywords
Input query
Keyword Index Store
Matching
Ranking
Search results
Figure 2: Online Serving
, where N is the number of samples andp is the predicted probability.
It was claimed in [31] that mean squared error (MSE) produced
beter results but our experiments showed the opposite.
4.6
Online Serving
TwinBERT is designed to adopt the latest NLP breakthroughs to IR
systems, particularly the paid search engine. Figure 2 outlines the
high-level architecture of TwinBERT-based information retrieval
system.
Te keywords that advertisers entered are stored in a distributed
database. As the oﬄine process of the system, keywords are ex-
tracted from the database and represented as embeddings {kj |j <
m} through keyword-side TwinBERT encoder. For eﬃcient re-
trieval, ANN techniques such as locality-sensitive hashing [5] and
k-d trees [8] are typically employed to improve search performance.
Speciﬁcally in TwinBERT, the keyword embeddings are stored and
organized in a graph structure as described in [34].
At run-time, when a user enters a search query, the query em-
bedding q is generated on-the-ﬂy by the query-side TwinBERT
encoder and ANN search is performed to ﬁnd the top results from
the pre-built keyword indices, which are normally pre-loaded in
memory.
4
5
EXPERIMENTS
Tis section presents training details and experimental results of
TwinBERT models. Section 5.1 introduces the data and hyper-
parameters used in teacher and student model training. Sections
5.2 and 5.3 give evaluation results on relevance and retrieval tasks.
In the relevance experiment, a few baseline models and two versions
of TwinBERT models, TwinBERTcos and TwinBERTres which diﬀer
in the design of the crossing layer, were evaluated. In the retrieval
experiment, where ANN was used when searching keywords in a
vector space, TwinBERTcos was picked and compared with C-DSSM
[28]. In 5.4, a few eﬀective training strategies are discussed. 5.5
gives the overall evaluation results. Lastly, in 5.6, inference time of
TwinBERT models with diﬀerent conﬁgurations are reported for
beter understanding on the design of TwinBERT models.
5.1
Teacher and Student Model Training
5.1.1
Training teacher model. Te teacher model used in this
paper was a BERT-Base (BERT12) model ﬁne-tuned from the un-
cased checkpoint trained and released by the authors of [6]. 5.8
million query-keyword data was used for ﬁne-tuning. In the data,
query-keywords were given labels which indicate 4 diﬀerent lev-
els of relevance: bad, fair, good and excellent. In the ﬁne-tuning
process, fair, good and excellent were mapped into one level which
was non-bad and the model learnt query-keyword relevance from
binary labels (bad vs. non-bad) based on cross-entropy loss. Hyper-
parameters of ﬁne-tuning were the same as what suggested in [6].
Batch size was set to 2, 048 and model was trained for 5 epochs.
5.1.2
Training student models. Te student models in this paper
were distilled from the same teacher model. 500 million impressions
were sampled from log and scored by the teacher model to generate
sof targets for student model training. In the training process of
TwinBERT, model parameters were randomly initialized and Adam
[14] was used for optimization. Training was done on four V100
GPUs and hyper-parameters were adopted from BERT pre-training
[6]: learning rate = 1e −4, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, L2 weight decay =
0.01. Te model was trained for 10 epochs with batch size set to
2, 048. Te two encoders in TwinBERT models were trained with
shared parameters.
5.2
Evaluation on Relevance Task
5.2.1
Experiment setup. In the relevance experiment, C-DSSM
and 3-layer BERT (BERT3) were chosen for baseline student models.
Te former proved to be eﬀective for information retrieval tasks
and here for fair comparison, the hidden size was set to be the
same as what used in TwinBERT, which was 512. Te later, as a
student model, was used in multiple knowledge distillation works
[30], [38]. In addition, BERT3 has about 46 million parameters,
which is comparable to TwinBERT model (35 million).
To evaluate the relevance performance of teacher and student
models, two test sets were sampled from logs in a major sponsored
search system. Tere are roughly 600,000 and 700,000 instances in
test set 1 and 2 respectively. Te two sets were sampled from diﬀer-
ent components in the system, so describe diﬀerent perspectives of
query-keyword relevance in the system. Both test sets are held-out.
Table 1: ROC-AUC of diﬀerent settings on test set 1
Token.
Pos.
Pooling
Crossing
L
AUC1
1
Tri-leter
√
Weighted
Cos
6
0.8883
2
Tri-leter
√
Weighted
Max + Res
6
0.9010
3
Tri-leter
√
Weighted
Max + Res
3
0.8994
4
Tri-leter
√
Weighted
Concat + Res
6
0.8995
5
WordPiece
√
Weighted
Max + Res
6
0.8987
6
Tri-leter
Weighted
Max + Res
6
0.8989
7
Tri-leter
√
CLS
Max + Res
6
0.8897
5.2.2
Eﬀects of Design Choices. In the design of TwinBERT, a
few choices were experimented before the model was ﬁnalized. Te
results are summarized in Table 1.
Number of layers: Comparing Seting 2 vs. Seting 3 suggests
that reducing the number of layers by half results in around 0.16%
drop in performance, which is signiﬁcant when talking about hun-
dreds of millions of impressions. If latency capacity allows, it is
beter to have deeper structure.
Crossing layer: Using max to combine the query and keyword
embeddings has beter performance than the naive concatenation
with about 0.15% gain (Seting 2 vs. Seting 4). Again, it is signif-
icant considering the scale of search. Max function produces an
abstraction of the two representations of query and keyword, and
helps with the generalization.
Token embedding: Character-level trigram representation out-
performs WordPiece by 0.26% (Seting 2 vs. Seting 5). Compared
to WordPiece, trigrams could map diﬀerent forms of a word to a
similar representation and have more dimensions. In the context of
sponsored search where query and keyword tend to have more out
of vocabulary words (e.g., typo words or invented names), these
pros are shown to be eﬀective in boosting the performance. Besides,
character-level trigrams are more eﬃcient at extraction.
Position embedding: In sponsored search, both the query and
keyword are ofen short phrases but the order of words is still
important and meaningful for understanding. Position embedding
helps to improve the performance by about 0.23% by comparing
Seting 2 to Seting 6.
Classiﬁcation token: Although in BERT, the signal from clas-
siﬁcation token hidden vector proves to be eﬀective in many down-
stream tasks, it is less eﬀective than weighted average when there is
a need to combine two embeddings. Te diﬀerence between Seting
7 and Seting 2 is as high as 1%, more signiﬁcant than other changes.
5.2.3
Model accuracy. Table 2 shows the ROC-AUC of Twin-
BERT models comparing with C-DSSM, BERT3 and BERT12. Te
AUC comparison of diﬀerent models is consistent on two test sets.
First of all, both TwinBERTcos and TwinBERTres outperform C-
DSSM model by 1.9% and 3.4% on test set 1 while 2.0% and 6.3% on
test set 2, which exhibits the advance of TwinBERT model’s archi-
tecture. However, the performance gap between TwinBERTcos and
TwinBERTres suggests that the current cosine version is still not
eﬀective enough to express the interaction between query and key-
word but the more complex residual network can. Compared with
BERT3, TwinBERTres achieves higher AUC (+0.17% and +0.07%),
and most impressively, its performance is close to BERT12 with
5
Table 2: ROC-AUC of TwinBERT models comparing with C-
DSSM, BERT3 and BERT12 on two test sets
Model
AUC1
AUC2
C-DSSM
0.8713
0.8571
BERT3
0.8995
0.9107
TwinBERTcos
0.8883
0.8743
TwinBERTres
0.9010
0.9113
BERT12
0.9011
0.9137
Table 3: Density diﬀerences of all 4 labels by comparing top
5 results from TwinBERTcos and C-DSSM
bad
fair
good
excellent
-7.4%
-2.6%
1.9%
18.8%
only -0.01% and -0.26% diﬀerences, which proves the eﬀectiveness of
TwinBERT model in distilling knowledge from a BERT-like teacher
model.
5.3
Evaluation on Retrieval Task
5.3.1
Experiment setup. In the retrieval experiment, C-DSSM
was selected as the baseline and compared with TwinBERTcos. Both
models were trained on the same training data with the same hyper-
parameters as described in the relevance experiment. Te evalua-
tion was conducted in three steps. Firstly, embeddings of queries
and keywords were generated with the model, and a keyword index
was built based on the embeddings of keywords. Secondly, ANN
search was performed to ﬁnd the top results from the pre-built
keyword indices. Lastly, top N results for each query were col-
lected and nDCG (normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain) was
evaluated for each model based on the editorial labels. Tis time,
all 4 labels were used for evaluation. In the experiment, the query
set had 2,000 randomly sampled queries and keyword set had 100
million randomly sampled keywords. Top 5 results were collected
for nDCG evaluation.
5.3.2
Model accuracy. nDCGs of TwinBERTcos and C-DSSM at
diﬀerent positions were presented in Figure 3. Te solid lines give
the nDCGs at diﬀerent positions for TwinBERTcos and C-DSSM
models. At all positions, TwinBERTcos is consistently beter than
C-DSSM by at least 5.3%. Te dashed lines show another group of
nDCGs by converting 4-level labels back to binary label. Similarly,
TwinBERTcos outperforms C-DSSM by at least 3.6%. Both results
indicate that TwinBERTcos embeddings capture more information
about query and keyword. Table 3 gives the density diﬀerences
of all 4 labels by comparing top 5 results from both models. Te
density diﬀerences show TwinBERTcos recalls 18.8% more excellent
and 7.4% less bad query-keywords, which proves its superiority in
retrieval tasks.
5.4
Eﬀective Training Strategies
Two training strategies, actual label ﬁne-tuning and asymmetric
training, were tested on top of the standard training process and will
1
2
3
4
5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
position
nDCG
C-DSSM (4 labels)
TwinBERTcos (4 labels)
C-DSSM (2 labels)
TwinBERTcos (2 labels)
Figure 3: nDCGs of TwinBERTcos and C-DSSM
Table 4: ROC-AUC of TwinBERT w/ actual label ﬁne-tuning
(FT) and asymmetric training (ASYM) on two test sets
Model
AUC1
AUC2
TwinBERTres
0.9010
0.9113
TwinBERTcos
0.8883
0.8743
TwinBERTres w/ FT
0.9030
0.9140
TwinBERTcos w/ FT
0.8926
0.8953
TwinBERTres w/ ASYM+FT
0.9033
0.9127
TwinBERTcos w/ ASYM+FT
0.8982
0.9057
be discussed in this section independently, as they are orthogonal
to the design of TwinBERT model.
5.4.1
Actual label fine-tuning. In the standard training process,
TwinBERT model learns parameters from sof labels generated by a
teacher model. Actual label ﬁne-tuning adds a round of ﬁne-tuning
based on the editorial labels post the standard training process.
Learning rate was further tuned down to 2e-5. Te ﬁne-tuning step
took 2 epochs to converge. Te ﬁrst 4 rows of Table 4 give the AUC
of TwinBERT models w/ and wo/ actual label ﬁne-tuning on the
same test sets used in the relevance experiment. On TwinBERTres,
the improvements are 0.22% and 0.3%, while on TwinBERTcos, the
improvements are much more signiﬁcant (0.48% and 2.4%). Te
gains demonstrate positive eﬀect of actual label ﬁne-tuning on both
models. Ofen, a teacher model establishes the upper bound of the
performance of student models, and it is worth pointing out that the
ﬁne-tuned TwinBERTres has already beat the teacher model on both
sets by 0.21% and 0.03%, which indicates that by introducing actual
labels, the ﬁne-tuning step can bring in additional information.
5.4.2
Asymmetric training. In the current architecture of Twin-
BERT model, to keep the structure simple, parameters are shared
between encoders, while asymmetric parameter training could po-
tentially bring higher performance. To further explore the eﬀect,
TwinBERT models were retrained with independent parameters
6
between the encoders. All other training parameters for both stan-
dard training and label ﬁne-tuning stayed the same. Te last 4 rows
of Table 4 give the AUC of models w/ and wo/ asymmetric training.
On TwinBERTcos, asymmetric training brings 0.63% and 1.2% AUC
gains on two test sets, which means TwinBERTcos does beneﬁt
from the more complex conﬁguration. However, on TwinBERTres,
even though training loss has slightly drop, AUC shows +0.03% and
-0.14% diﬀerences on two test sets suggesting asymmetric is barely
eﬀective when crossing layer is more complex.
5.5
Overall Results
In summary, the best TwinBERT model (TwinBERTres) achieves
3.4% and 0.17% AUC improvements over C-DSSM and BERT3 stu-
dent models following the teacher-student framework, which demon-
strates its eﬀectiveness in distilling knowledge from a BERT-like
teacher model. On top of that, actual label ﬁne-tuning and asym-
metric training help boosting the performance with another 0.26%
incremental gain. Overall, the best TwinBERT model outper-
forms C-DSSM and BERT3 models by 3.7% and 0.42% while
also beats the teacher model, BERT12, by 0.24%.
5.6
Inference Time
To test the inference time, we implemented TwinBERT and the
baseline models using PyTorch based on [35] and ran benchmarks
on a workstation with the following conﬁguration: Intel® Core™i7-
4790 CPU @ 3.6GHz and 32.0GB memory. To eliminate the impact
of noise on queries, we evaluated the average inference time on
1,000 queries and the results are summarized in Table 5.
One of the beneﬁts of TwinBERT compared to BERT is that the
two inputs are decoupled and if the query stays the same, there is
no need to regenerate the query embedding. Tis could be more
clearly explained by the time complexity of TwinBERT and BERT
w.r.t number of queries (Nq) and number of keywords (Nk). Te
time complexity of TwinBERT is O(TeNq(1+Nk)+TcNqNk), while
it isO(TBNqNk) for a BERT model. Here, we useTe,Tc,TB to denote
the time cost of a single encoder in TwinBERT model, the crossing
layer in TwinBERT model and BERT model respectively. Another
beneﬁt of TwinBERT is that, in certain scenarios like sponsored
search, the keyword embeddings could be pre-computed and loaded
in memory so there’s no computation for keyword encoding at run-
time. Tus, the time complexity of TwinBERT during serving could
be even simpliﬁed to O(TeNq + TcNqNk). In Table 5, QEL refers
to the number of query encoding loops and the boolean factor
(Memory) indicates if the keyword embeddings are in memory.
Te number of keywords is another important factor to consider
when talking about eﬃciency for the initial retrieval phase and
reﬁnement/ranking phase afer. More speciﬁcally, it impacts the
time complexity of the evaluation of crossing layers in TwinBERT
model O(TcNqNk) and the evaluation of BERT model O(TBNqNk).
In the test, the average number of keywords per query is designed
to be 100.
Te ﬁrst two rows in Table 5 correspond to the inference time
for TwinBERTcos and TwinBERTres to score 100 keywords per
query assuming only the query-side encoder and crossing layer are
performed. Te computation cost of cosine similarity is much lower
than residual network, which leads to the 8ms diﬀerence. Compared
Table 5: Average inference time for TwinBERT, BERT3 and
BERT12 over 1,000 queries. QEL refers to the number of
query encoding loops.
Model
QEL
Memory
Inf. time (ms)
TwinBERTcos
1
√
14
TwinBERTres
1
√
22
TwinBERTres
1
1,077
TwinBERTres
100
2,144
BERT3
100
1,699
BERT12
100
9,282
to the last two rows of BERT3 and BERT12, where the query and
keyword are concatenated and encoded as a whole, the eﬃciency
of TwinBERTres is 77 and 422 times faster. With TwinBERTcos, the
eﬃciency is even 121 and 663 times faster. Moreover, if the keyword
embeddings are generated at run-time, the overall inference time
is still beter than BERT3 according to Row 3 and Row 5. However,
if the query embedding is also repeatedly generated, the inference
time of TwinBERT becomes higher than BERT3 as listed in Row 4.
6
TWINBERT IN PRODUCTION SYSTEM
TwinBERT models have been successfully deployed in the backend
of a major sponsored search system and are proved to be very
eﬀective and eﬃcient in both retrieval and relevance tasks with
acceptable latency. Te models achieved 90+% of the incremental
gains observed from a ﬁne-tuned BERT12 model and bad ads in
online impressions decreased by 10+% in production. However,
the additional serving cost is minimum even on CPUs, compared
to the service of a BERT12 model which is not feasible on CPUs
but requires hundreds of GPUs. On query side, model is served
with onnx runtime online and the latency of TwinBERT inference
is less than 10ms on average, which could be shadowed by other
serving components if it is not on a critical path. On document
side, embeddings are prepared oﬄine and indexed in a distributed
database for serving. At run-time, only the latency of crossing
layers is introduced to the overall latency, which is subtle in a
distributed serving system. In addition, the embeddings could be
mapped to a lower dimension to further improve the eﬃciency of
crossing layers and also reduce the cost on storage in practise.
7
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Te TwinBERT model presented in this paper successfully adapts
the technical advances from the pre-trained language models to
the area of information retrieval. Decoupling the two inputs and
pre-computing embeddings oﬄine improve eﬃciency by 77+ and
422+ times on BERT3 and BERT12 on a presumable number of
100 queries, which enables real-time online serving on CPUs. Te
innovations on network layers manage to keep majority of the
performance gain from BERT12, which makes TwinBERT eﬀective
in both retrieval and relevance tasks.
TwinBERT models have demonstrated to be as eﬀective as BERT-
Base model. Going forward, more experiments need to be con-
ducted to evaluate the performance with a teacher model that has
7
larger capacity such as BERT-Large. Furthermore, TwinBERT mod-
els are developed based on original Transformer. As the increas-
ing demand of model performance, further improvement could be
achieved through innovations on Transformer.
To make the presentation pragmatic and intuitive, TwinBERT is
introduced in the context of information retrieval. However, Twin-
BERT is not constrained by a speciﬁc problem domain. Looking
forward, eﬀorts will be spent on other domains such as question
answering.
REFERENCES
[1] Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. 2017.
Enriching word vectors with subword information. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics 5 (2017), 135–146.
[2] Cristian Buciluf, Rich Caruana, and Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil. 2006. Model
compression. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 535–541.
[3] Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua, Nicole Limtiaco, Rhomni St.
John, Noah Constant, Mario Guajardo-Cespedes, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar, Yun-
Hsuan Sung, Brian Strope, and Ray Kurzweil. 2018. Universal Sentence Encoder.
CoRR abs/1803.11175 (2018). arXiv:1803.11175 htp://arxiv.org/abs/1803.11175
[4] Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Loic Barrault, and Antoine
Bordes. 2017. Supervised learning of universal sentence representations from
natural language inference data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.02364 (2017).
[5] Mayur Datar, Nicole Immorlica, Piotr Indyk, and Vahab S Mirrokni. 2004. Locality-
sensitive hashing scheme based on p-stable distributions. In Proceedings of the
twentieth annual symposium on Computational geometry. ACM, 253–262.
[6] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[7] Benjamin Edelman, Michael Ostrovsky, and Michael Schwarz. 2007. Internet
advertising and the generalized second-price auction: Selling billions of dollars
worth of keywords. American economic review 97, 1 (2007), 242–259.
[8] Jerome H Friedman, Jon Louis Bentley, and Raphael Ari Finkel. 1976. An algo-
rithm for ﬁnding best matches in logarithmic time. ACM Trans. Math. Sofware
3, SLAC-PUB-1549-REV. 2 (1976), 209–226.
[9] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2016. Deep residual
learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and patern recognition. 770–778.
[10] Felix Hill, Kyunghyun Cho, and Anna Korhonen. 2016. Learning Distributed
Representations of Sentences from Unlabelled Data. CoRR abs/1602.03483 (2016).
arXiv:1602.03483 htp://arxiv.org/abs/1602.03483
[11] Geoﬀrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and JeﬀDean. 2015. Distilling the knowledge in
a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 (2015).
[12] Po-Sen Huang, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, Alex Acero, and Larry
Heck. 2013. Learning deep structured semantic models for web search using
clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on
Information & Knowledge Management. ACM, 2333–2338.
[13] Xiaoqi Jiao, Yichun Yin, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, Xiao Chen, Linlin Li, Fang
Wang, and Qn Liu. 2019. TinyBERT: Distilling BERT for Natural Language
Understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.10351 (2019).
[14] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A Method for Stochastic
Optimization. In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings. htp:
//arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
[15] Ryan Kiros, Yukun Zhu, Ruslan R Salakhutdinov, Richard Zemel, Raquel Urtasun,
Antonio Torralba, and Sanja Fidler. 2015. Skip-thought vectors. In Advances in
neural information processing systems. 3294–3302.
[16] Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush
Sharma, and Radu Soricut. 2019. ALBERT: A Lite BERT for Self-supervised
Learning of Language Representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11942 (2019).
[17] Xiaodong Liu, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. 2019. Improv-
ing Multi-Task Deep Neural Networks via Knowledge Distillation for Natural
Language Understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09482 (2019).
[18] Xiaodong Liu, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. 2019. Multi-
task deep neural networks for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.11504 (2019).
[19] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ot, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen,
Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zetlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019. Roberta:
A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692
(2019).
[20] Lajanugen Logeswaran and Honglak Lee. 2018. An eﬃcient framework for
learning sentence representations. CoRR abs/1803.02893 (2018). arXiv:1803.02893
htp://arxiv.org/abs/1803.02893
[21] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeﬀrey Dean. 2013. Eﬃcient
estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781
(2013).
[22] Seyed-Iman Mirzadeh, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Ang Li, and Hassan Ghasemzadeh.
2019. Improved knowledge distillation via teacher assistant: Bridging the gap
between student and teacher. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.03393 (2019).
[23] Jeﬀrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher Manning. 2014. Glove:
Global vectors for word representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP). 1532–1543.
[24] Mathew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Mat Gardner, Christopher
Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zetlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word
representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05365 (2018).
[25] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. 2018.
Improving language understanding with unsupervised learning. Technical Report.
Technical report, OpenAI.
[26] Colin Raﬀel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang,
Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2019.
Exploring
the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Uniﬁed Text-to-Text Transformer.
arXiv:cs.LG/1910.10683
[27] Ying Shan, T Ryan Hoens, Jian Jiao, Haijing Wang, Dong Yu, and JC Mao. 2016.
Deep crossing: Web-scale modeling without manually crafed combinatorial
features. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on
knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 255–262.
[28] Yelong Shen, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, and Gr´egoire Mesnil. 2014.
Learning semantic representations using convolutional neural networks for web
search. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web.
ACM, 373–374.
[29] Sandeep Subramanian, Adam Trischler, Yoshua Bengio, and Christopher J. Pal.
2018. Learning General Purpose Distributed Sentence Representations via Large
Scale Multi-task Learning. CoRR abs/1804.00079 (2018). arXiv:1804.00079 htp:
//arxiv.org/abs/1804.00079
[30] Siqi Sun, Yu Cheng, Zhe Gan, and Jingjing Liu. 2019. Patient knowledge distilla-
tion for bert model compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09355 (2019).
[31] Raphael Tang, Yao Lu, Linqing Liu, Lili Mou, Olga Vechtomova, and Jimmy
Lin. 2019. Distilling Task-Speciﬁc Knowledge from BERT into Simple Neural
Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.12136 (2019).
[32] Iulia Turc, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Well-
read students learn beter: Te impact of student initialization on knowledge
distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08962 (2019).
[33] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Atention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information processing systems. 5998–6008.
[34] Jingdong Wang and Shipeng Li. 2012. Qery-driven iterated neighborhood graph
search for large scale indexing. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM international
conference on Multimedia. ACM, 179–188.
[35] Tomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement De-
langue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, R’emi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz,
and Jamie Brew. 2019. HuggingFace’s Transformers: State-of-the-art Natural
Language Processing. ArXiv abs/1910.03771 (2019).
[36] Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Qoc V Le, Mohammad Norouzi,
Wolfgang Macherey, Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, et al.
2016. Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between
human and machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144 (2016).
[37] Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
and Qoc V Le. 1906. XLNet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language
understanding, 2019. URL htps://www. arxiv. org/abs (1906).
[38] Ze Yang, Linjun Shou, Ming Gong, Wutao Lin, and Daxin Jiang. 2019. Model
Compression with Multi-Task Knowledge Distillation for Web-scale Qestion
Answering System. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09636 (2019).
[39] Zhengyan Zhang, Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu, Xin Jiang, Maosong Sun, and Qn Liu.
2019. ERNIE: Enhanced Language Representation with Informative Entities.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07129 (2019).
[40] Wei Zhu, Xiaofeng Zhou, Keqiang Wang, Xun Luo, Xiepeng Li, Yuan Ni, and
Guotong Xie. 2019. PANLP at MEDIQA 2019: Pre-trained Language Models,
Transfer Learning and Knowledge Distillation. In Proceedings of the 18th BioNLP
Workshop and Shared Task. 380–388.
[41] Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Richard S. Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun,
Antonio Torralba, and Sanja Fidler. 2015. Aligning Books and Movies: Towards
Story-like Visual Explanations by Watching Movies and Reading Books. CoRR
abs/1506.06724 (2015). arXiv:1506.06724 htp://arxiv.org/abs/1506.06724
8
