Pages: 10
--- Page 1 ---
Personalization of Web-search Using Short-term
Browsing Context
Yury Ustinovskiy
Yandex
Leo Tolstoy st. 16, Moscow, Russia
yuraust@yandex-team.ru
Pavel Serdyukov
Yandex
Leo Tolstoy st. 16, Moscow, Russia
pavser@yandex-team.ru
ABSTRACT
Search and browsing activity is known to be a valuable
source of information about user’s search intent. It is ex-
tensively utilized by most of modern search engines to im-
prove ranking by constructing certain ranking features as
well as by personalizing search. Personalization aims at two
major goals: extraction of stable preferences of a user and
speciﬁcation and disambiguation of the current query. The
common way to approach these problems is to extract infor-
mation from user’s search and browsing long-term history
and to utilize short-term history to determine the context of
a given query. Personalization of the web search for the ﬁrst
queries in new search sessions of new users is more diﬃcult
due to the lack of both long- and short-term data.
In this paper we study the problem of short-term person-
alization. To be more precise, we restrict our attention to
the set of initial queries of search sessions. These, with the
lack of contextual information, are known to be the most
challenging for short-term personalization and are not cov-
ered by previous studies on the subject. To approach this
problem in the absence of the search context, we employ
short-term browsing context. We apply a widespread frame-
work for personalization of search results based on the re-
ranking approach and evaluate our methods on the large
scale data. The proposed methods are shown to signiﬁcantly
improve non-personalized ranking of one of the major com-
mercial search engines. To the best of our knowledge this
is the ﬁrst study addressing the problem of short-term per-
sonalization based on recent browsing history. We ﬁnd that
performance of this re-ranking approach can be reasonably
predicted given a query. When we restrict the use of our
method to the queries with largest expected gain, the re-
sulting beneﬁt of personalization increases signiﬁcantly.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.4.6 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—Search process
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CIKM’13, Oct. 27–Nov. 1, 2013, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2263-8/13/10 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2505515.2505679.
Keywords
Personalization, re-ranking, browsing sessions, search con-
text, machine learning.
1.
INTRODUCTION
The classical approach to web retrieval considers a user’s
request aside from her personality, context of the request,
nature of the search intent. In the past decade the situation
has drastically changed. Now modern commercial search en-
gines tend to employ not only information about the query
itself, but also all knowledge about searcher’s personality
expressed in her long-term interests, context of the current
query and her engagement with certain web pages. Recent
studies [15, 20, 8, 2] show that properly processed click-
through and browsing logs can signiﬁcantly improve quality
of the classical ranking. Browsing and search sessions con-
stitute the major part of user activity studied by researchers
and provide one of the most powerful sources of data for per-
sonalization of search results and context-sensitive ranking.
Search session is a series of intent-related user’s requests
to a search engine. Similarly, a series of Web pages visited by
a user with similar intent are referred to as a browsing ses-
sion. Modern studies [20, 8] prove that usage of search click-
through logs helps to disambiguate the current information
need of a searcher as well as to construct her interests proﬁle.
At the same time, there is not much known about applicabil-
ity of the browsing sessions to the same tasks, though several
works [19, 1] provide comprehensive studies of the nature of
the post-search browsing sessions and suggest various ways
to incorporate them into the design of a search engine.
In the current study we address the problem of person-
alization of the Web search for new users. Since long-term
search history is sparse or completely absent for them, we
perform only short-term personalization. Moreover, we re-
strict our attention to the most arduous queries: ﬁrst queries
in the search session with lack of even short-term search con-
text. The research questions motivated our study are:
1. What portion of queries cannot be covered by person-
alization methods based on the short-term search con-
text?
2. To what extent could short-term browsing context im-
prove ranking on those queries?
3. How does the length of the utilized browsing session
aﬀect the performance of short-term personalization?
4. How to select exactly those queries that have potential
to beneﬁt from the given personalization approach?

--- Page 2 ---
By analyzing the search and browsing logs of a major com-
mercial search engine we demonstrate that a considerable
volume of queries has very little short-term contextual in-
formation from the search session itself. These queries are
challenging for the state-of-the-art short-term personaliza-
tion methods based on search context, so we adopt a person-
alization framework based on re-ranking using short-term
browsing context.
We also extract various statistics from
browsing sessions of other users to improve ranking for the
current user. Each re-ranking approach has its applicabil-
ity limits and inappropriate employment could even harm
the quality of a search engine. To cope with this issue we
present a method of automatic ﬁltering of queries suitable
for context-aware personalization.
Our study is completely data-driven, i.e. both sets for
training and evaluation are extracted from user logs.
To sum up, the contributions of the present study are:
• Utilization of short browsing context in a personal-
ization framework based on re-ranking. Most impor-
tantly, it allows to improve ranking for queries with the
lack of search-context and for users without long-term
interest proﬁles.
• Development of a framework for automatic learning
of a ﬁlter that distinguishes queries to be personal-
ized.
Each re-ranking algorithm has its own scope,
and the ﬁltering directly depends on a personalization
algorithm.
• Utilization of knowledge about recent browsing experi-
ence of other users to improve search experience of a
new user.
• Comprehensive analysis of importance of various sources
of data and features extracted from them for short-
term personalization based on browsing context.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2
we describe related work relevant to our research. We brieﬂy
describe the data employed for further evaluations in Sec-
tion 3. In Section 4 we give examples of short- and long-
term-based personalization cases and observe some statis-
tics about typical search sessions to motivate our study. In
Section 5 we describe in detail our method based on a com-
mon framework for personalization. We discuss features em-
ployed in our study in Section 6 and experiments themselves
in Section 7. Finally, we conclude our research in Section 8.
2.
RELATED WORK
Personalization of web search gains more and more inter-
est in the last years. It has been realized that employment
of contextual and personal information from browsing and
search logs has the potential to signiﬁcantly improve ranking
quality.
The ﬁrst studies on the subject mostly used short-term
search context and long-term search history. In [15] Shen et
al. incorporated previous queries and their click-throughs to
specify the actual information need of a searcher. Authors
analyzed several context-sensitive language models based on
queries submitted in the same session and snippets clicked on
by a user. All methods were evaluated on the TREC collec-
tion augmented with click-through data. Xiang et al. [20] de-
veloped Shen’s initial approach further by integrating learn-
ing to rank ideas into short-term personalization.
They
Type\Source of data
Search session
Browsing session
Long-term
[15] [2] [16]
[11]
Short-term
[20] [2]
Current study
Table 1: Types of personalization employed in pre-
vious studies.
learned a model on click-based and text-based features ex-
tracted from search session and evaluated the model on both
human labelled data and user clicks. Bennett et al. in [2]
proposed a uniﬁed framework that combines long-term and
short-term behaviour of a user in a search engine. It com-
prises queries issued by a user during a long period of activ-
ity and documents clicked on as well as during short-term
search session interaction. In [16] Sontag et al. utilize user’s
long-term search history to tune parameters of user-speciﬁc
ranking model. The model extracts the personal topic dis-
tribution on the ODP (Open Directory Project) categories
and re-weights the results according to this. The method
shows maximal performance on ambiguous acronyms. Let
us remind that we tackle the problem of “zero” context in
terms of the context studied in these papers, as we assume
that we have neither short-term search session context, nor
long-term user preferences.
Recently commercial search engines started to distribute
special toolbars that record user activity in browsers. These
browsing logs give more speciﬁc picture of user’s actions on
the Web and become one of the major sources of personal-
ization data nowadays. The nature of search trails — parts
of a browsing log initiated by a query — is the subject of
study by White et al. in [19]. Authors analyze the evolu-
tion of various characteristics (e.g. relevance, novelty) in the
course of the trail. The observations in this work demon-
strate the possible value of search trails for search engines.
White et al. in [18] considered a problem of recovering short-
term interest using both browsing and search context. They
predicted an optimal weight to assign to context in order
to combine it with query and predict the ODP label of a
clicked document. Note that authors leave the problem of
employment of derived context information in web search for
a future work and also use the combination of browsing and
search context, so do not consider the cases, where there is
no short-term search context available. Matthijs and Radlin-
ski in [11] study the usefulness of a set of features extracted
from long-term browsing history by tuning a few parameters
(without using any actual machine learning algorithm and
only on 72 queries). Results of both oﬄine experiment on
this set of queries and online evaluation are reported. Un-
like Matthijs and Radlinski we utilize short-term browsing
context for personalization and conduct oﬄine evaluation on
the large-scale dataset of 500K queries.
Various types and sources of data for personalization uti-
lized in the previous studies are summarized in Table 1.
3.
DATA
As we mentioned above, search and browsing history con-
stitutes the major source of data for short- and long-term
personalization. While the entire query log is valuable for
long-term personalization, only some recent records are im-
portant for short-term personalization. To be more precise,
only the pages visited with the same or similar informa-
tion need could possibly give proper context for the cur-

--- Page 3 ---
rent query. The idea of a series of pages (queries) with the
same intent is usually formalised in the notion of a browsing
(search) logical session.
Definition. Browsing (resp. search) logical session (or log-
ical session) is a subset of the user’s browsing (resp. search)
log, consisting of intent-related pages, i.e. pages visited with
the same or similar search goal.
The problem of accurate identiﬁcation of logical sessions
is rather hard and is a subject of independent studies [3,
9]. To avoid unnecessary complications most studies apply
common convention: a set of successive browsed pages (sub-
mitted queries) is attributed to one logical session, unless it
is followed by 30 minutes of inactivity. This simple heuristic
allows eﬃciently and eﬀectively divide the whole history log
into intent-related parts. It is an interesting research ques-
tion (which is addressed in [3, 9, 18] for search sessions) how
quality of the partition aﬀects quality of the data extracted
from logical sessions. However this question is out of the
scope of our study and, following previous works, we divide
the browsing log into sessions on the basis of 30 minutes in-
activity timeout. Further these sessions are simply referred
to as browsing sessions.
Similarly, the web pages visited by a user prior to for-
mulating a query q in the same session are called browsing
context and queries issued before q respectively are called
search context.
Now we describe the data organization and information
that is available in our study.
Our personalization algo-
rithm was trained and evaluated on the fully anonymized
real browsing sessions collected from one of the major search
engines via its special browser toolbar for 8 days. The tool-
bar store URLs of all non-personal pages visited by a user
and links followed during the browsing. It does not store
texts of the visited web pages. In total we have collected
200M browsing sessions.
175M sessions from ﬁrst 7 days
were used for session statistics extraction, see Section 6. The
last 8th day was used for the training/test dataset construc-
tion: we keep all browsing sessions with at least one query
and with at least one page in the browsing session preced-
ing the ﬁrst query. To purify our data for the 8th day we
ﬁltered out all browsing sessions with deliberately useless
context, namely we deleted a query if all preceding browsed
pages are private or from the same host as the search engine.
Since our personalized ranking step and the ﬁnal evaluation
metrics rely solely on click-through data, we deleted all the
queries with no clicks on their SERPs. After ﬁltering and
all puriﬁcations we sampled 500K browsing sessions for per-
sonalization training and evaluation.
4.
MOTIVATION
Let us start this section with an example of cases cov-
ered by each of the long- and short-term personalization
methods. First, assume that we have a researcher with spe-
cialization in Information Retrieval submitted query ‘MRR‘
into a search engine. Then he is likely to be interested in
an article on ‘Mean Reciprocal Rank‘. At the same time, if
an identical query is submitted by an amateur sportsmen in
UK, the search engine should return at the ﬁrst position an
article on ‘Manchester Road Race‘. This is a simple exam-
ple of an ambiguous query, which is covered by long-term
personalization. Second, let the same query be submitted
by a searcher for which a search engine has no complete in-
formation about her personality, after reading a page with
0 %
5 %
10 %
15 %
20 %
25 %
30 %
35 %
40 %
 1
 5
 10
 15
 20
Portion of queries
Position in search session
Figure 1: Histogram of positions of queries in their
search sessions
0 %
5 %
10 %
15 %
20 %
25 %
30 %
35 %
40 %
45 %
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
Portion of the ﬁrst queries
The length of the browsing session
Figure 2: Histogram of lengths of browsing sessions
prior to formulating the ﬁrst query.
title ‘Internet marketing‘. Then probably the searcher is in-
terested in an article on ‘Master Resell Right‘. Here is the
case, where short-term personalization based on the brows-
ing context comes out. In either case we improve the quality
of the original non-personalized ranking by adding personal
and contextual bias.
Previous studies on personalization either omit the ﬁrst
queries in search sessions or process them only with the long-
term personalization. For instance, in [2] authors consider
these queries and report zero performance of the personal-
ization based on the search history and respectively modest
improvement of personalization based on long history.
Obviously, the distribution of browsing sessions lengths
and of number of queries per sessions heavily depend on
various speciﬁc characteristics of a search engine. However,
we report these distributions on our data to demonstrate
the possible beneﬁt from short-term personalization based
on the browsing sessions in our setting.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of search positions of queries
in their sessions. It follows that 39% of queries have no short-
term search context for personalization (the same numbers
are reported in [18]) and 58% of queries have ≤1 queries for
contextualization. It proves that the large portion of queries
suﬀers from the lack of search context for short-term person-
alization. To overcome these limits of short-term personal-
ization based on search context one needs to ﬁnd some new
source of data.

--- Page 4 ---
One obvious solution is to incorporate long-term history.
It covers all queries of users with suﬃcient search history
and in that way allows to cope with ﬁrst requests in search
sessions, though it does not help new users. Therefore we de-
cided to analyze the utility of the preceding browsing session
for short-term personalization. Figure 2 shows the distribu-
tion of lengths of browsing sessions prior to formulating the
ﬁrst query. From this plot we conclude that the majority of
ﬁrst queries in search sessions has very rich browsing con-
text: all except 41% of queries have at least one preceding
web page in the same session. Although most queries have
some browsing context, we are interested in the range of
applicability of this data and restrict ourselves considering
K = 1, . . . , 10 pages visited prior to the current query.
5.
METHOD
In this section we describe our method of personalization.
We start with presenting the general personalization frame-
work based on a re-ranking approach [20, 8, 2]. This frame-
work is rather popular due to the simplicity of its implemen-
tation, the transparency of the ranking process and possi-
bility of additional tuning. This framework is the core part
of our approach and we also discuss its speciﬁcations. Es-
sentially, the method runs in two steps: click prediction and
re-ranking. Afterwards, we describe the additional query ﬁl-
tering step, which identiﬁes requests that can be potentially
enhanced by our personalization method.
5.1
Click prediction problem
Let L = {
 u, q, S(q), C(q)

} be a set of records from a
click-through log: each record contains user’s u query q,
search engine result page S(q) = {s1, . . . , s10} and her clicks
C(q) = {c1, . . . , c10} on the SERP, ci ∈{0, 1}. At the click
prediction step we aim to recover ci for each sample of the
form {u, q, si}. Namely, a sample {u, q, si} receives a posi-
tive judgement if document si was clicked by the user for the
query q and gets negative judgement otherwise. Our goal is
to learn labels ci from the set of features. That is a standard
way to get personalized relevance judgements [2, 16, 11].
The features employed in this step are determined by the
type of personalization performed and by the available data.
For instance, in the case of long-term personalization we
can leverage historical information about clicks, queries and
pages visited by the user. On the contrary, for short-term
personalization we use user’s actions in the search engine
and browser during the current session right before formu-
lating the query. Note that the eﬀective combination of these
methods is an interesting and challenging research ques-
tion [18, 2], although it is not the subject of the current
study. As we have mentioned, we restrict our attention to
the ﬁrst queries of search sessions, so only browsing context
could by employed for short-term personalization. For these
queries with lack of search context we consider K last web
pages from the browsing session as a context:
B = {bK, bK−1, . . . , b1}
|
{z
}
Browsing session
−→q −→S(q) −→
C(q)
|{z}
Ground truth
(1)
In general click prediction problem is very hard and ad-
mits accurate solution in very restrictive cases (see e.g. [12]).
However, we are interested in ranking quality of our predic-
tor rather than in its recall, precision or perplexity.
5.2
Re-ranking problem
From now on let’s assume that the click prediction prob-
lem is solved, i.e. for each sample {u, q, si} we have value pi
that estimates ci. The predicted values are utilized to pro-
duce new ranking of the top k documents retrieved for q by
original ranking. There is a number of methods in previous
studies that suggest various ways to perform the re-ranking
step. Proper approach depends on many factors including
the quality of estimators pi and features used at the predic-
tion step. Also some freedom in re-ranking step gives the
opportunity for additional tuning of personalized ranking.
The simplest way to personalize SERP is just to rank all
documents according to the value of pi, assuming that the
higher pi the more likely it will be clicked. The main disad-
vantage of the approach is the lack of ﬂexibility: often per-
sonalization harms the initial ranking’s quality, so we would
like get rid of undesirable re-rankings.
To approach that
problem one can control aggressiveness of personalization
by introducing smoothing parameter µ ∈[0; 1] and ranking
using Borda’s ranking fusion (see e.g. [20]):
score(si) = (1 −µ)
1
r(si) + µ1
i .
(2)
where i is the original ranking position, r(si) — the new
position.
Large smoothing parameter µ results into “al-
most” baseline non-personalized ranking, i.e. we swap docu-
ments only if we are strongly convinced in superiority of one
over the other. On the contrary, small values of µ lead to
very aggressive personalization which aﬀects large volume of
queries. Further in our experiments (see Section 7.4.2) we
evaluate the eﬀect of smoothing (2) for various values of µ.
5.3
Query ﬁltering
Any re-ranking method is potentially beneﬁcial only for a
certain subset of queries. Some users, sessions and queries
in principle could not beneﬁt from certain re-ranking meth-
ods: often the latter only harms the baseline ranking qual-
ity. To avoid undesirable losses we construct a classiﬁer that
predicts the possible gain from personalization for a given
query. The core diﬀerence from similar classiﬁers described
in previous studies (see e.g. [14, 17]) is its direct dependence
on the constructed re-ranking algorithm.
Let R0 and R1 be two rankings: the baseline and the new
personalized rankings respectively.
Assume that for each
ranking and any query q submitted by a user u we have some
quality measure M(R0, q). Then we assign to every query q
a diﬀerence M(R1, q)−M(R0, q). This is our ground truth,
which distinguishes the queries that beneﬁt from reranking
from the others. Our aim is to predict whether the diﬀerence
is greater or smaller than zero. We extract a set of features
for each pair (u, q) and apply a machine learning approach
to estimate the value M(R0, q) −M(R1, q).
Any feature
F(u, q, si) (including si-independent features) employed at
the click prediction step results into a new feature averaged
over all documents from S(q):
AvF(u, q) = 1
10
X
si∈S(q)
F(u, q, si).
In our setting we again take user’s clicks on SERP S(q)
as implicit relevance judgements and use reciprocal rank of
the last user’s click as a performance measure M (see equa-
tion (3) below). It is important to note that feature and

--- Page 5 ---
training set generation for query ﬁltering step can be done
automatically given click prediction features and its valida-
tion set. So, learning of ﬁlter does not require any additional
data and is speciﬁc for our re-ranking method.
Learned predictor f(u, q, S) allows subtle tuning of a per-
sonalization method: re-ranking is applied exactly for the
queries q with f(u, q, S) greater than some ﬁxed threshold
θ. Setting θ is equivalent to the choice of portion of queries
aﬀected by personalization.
6.
FEATURES
In this section we ﬁx some notations and give a detailed
account of features derived from the available data. Let u
be a user who started her search session with a query q. As-
sume that pages B = {bK, . . . , b1} were visited by u in the
same logical session prior to formulating query q (see equa-
tion (1)). As above, let S(q) = {s1, . . . , s10} be a result page
for q and C(q) = {c1, . . . , c10} user’s clicks on the result page.
We pick out up to 10 pages bi visited before q as the source
of contextual information. The tuple {u, B, q, S(q), C(q)} is
referred to as conﬁguration.
Our primary goal is to ﬁnd
the best ranking for every conﬁguration.
Each conﬁgura-
tion plus a document from the result page si forms a sample
for the click prediction problem with ground truth ci.
Now we list all features used by our personalized ranker
and give a brief motivation for their employment. In gen-
eral, for accurate short-term personalization it is necessary
to solve two problems: 1) understand whether available con-
textual information is useful for the ranking of the current
conﬁguration, and 2) if so, ﬁnd out which documents of S(q)
are relevant to the contextualized information need. We ex-
tract features for both of these problems and use them twice:
during the click prediction step (Section 5.1) and during
the query ﬁltering step (Section 5.3). We report coverage
of each feature, as it is important to understand the qual-
ity of sparse features such us click-through-based statistics,
see Table 2. Some of personalization algorithms utilize tex-
tual information from long- and short-term data.However,
a browser toolbar records visited URLs only and does not
send the content of pages to the search engine in real-time
(due to privacy and network latency related reasons).
We summarise employed classes of features as follows:
• Characteristics of the query q.
Features 1-4.
The better non-personalized ranking for a query the
less likely we are able to improve its quality, so we use
NumDocs as a measure of quality of a query. Navi-
gational queries are requests with intention of ﬁnding
a particular web page. Thus, if a search engine has
recognised navigational intent of a query, it is very
undesirable to aﬀect ﬁrst position during re-ranking.
To avoid it, we use Nav(q) — predicted probability
of query q being navigational, produced with the pro-
prietary classiﬁer inside our search engine. Ambigu-
ous queries are known to beneﬁt from various types of
personalization, so we added the entropy of the distri-
bution over topics of the proprietary directory of web
sites (similar to ODP) of 10 SERP pages retrieved for
a query as a measure of ambiguity.
• Usefulness of browsing session B as the context
of q.
Features 5-12.
Temporal and session-based
proximity between documents bj’s and query q is an
important signal for potential improvement of initial
ranking of S(q) on the basis of the context derived
from bj. We extract BrowseTime(bj) as the indicator
of possibility of intent shift and the time spent on bj
prior to opening a new tab — Time(bj).
Navigational behaviour of the user in the browser prior
to formulating a query gives strong evidence of her
commitment to the current topic. At any moment of
time user has several opportunities: she can follow a
link from the current page, go to a previously opened
tab, click ‘back’ button or start a new tab (e.g. by man-
ually typing address, following a bookmark or an ex-
ternal link). We store activities of a user in a browsing
graph, consisting of visited URL’s and followed links
(so we do not know which tab user is actually viewing).
That is: out degrees of vertices — Deg(bj), number of
leaves — Leaves, edge count — Links, number of ver-
tices BrLen. The larger BrLen, Leaves, Time(bj),
Deg(bj) and Links the higher user’s interest in the
current topic and therefore the closer its relationship
with a subsequent query.
• Click-through-based proximity between si and
bj. Features 13-22. User behaviour during browsing
session constitutes a rich source of knowledge about
latent semantic connections among web pages.
We
processed the large-scale browsing log of 175M ses-
sions (see Section 3) and aggregated session statistics
about co-occurrence of pages and hosts in one brows-
ing session. The known issue in employment of click-
through- and browsing-based features is their sparsity.
To overcome this problem, besides basic page-to-page
statistics we also extracted their host-to-host analogues
(see “coverage” column in Table 2).
Collected raw
counts are: Nums(p1, p2) — the number of cooccur-
rences of pages p1 and p2 in one browsing session in
the same order, Numh(h1, h2) — the number of cooc-
currences of hosts h1 and h2 in one browsing session
in the same order.
Our aim is to use recent browsing experience of other
users to better understand the current search experi-
ence of a new user. For each pair of pages bj, si from B
and C(q) we compute various statistics on the basis of
these counts: Conditional probability of browsing from
bj to si:
PO(si|bj) = Nums(bj, si)
P Nums(bj, ·);
Pointwise mutual information of occurrences of bj and
si in one session in the same order:
PmiO(si, bj) = log
P(bj, si)
P(si)P(bj).
Also we compute their analogues for hosts and for un-
ordered cooccurrence (PU(·|·) and PmiU(·, ·)).
• SERP-aggregated features. Features 33-42. Be-
sides query- and session-based features we also add
their analogues averaged over all documents on SERP
(see Section 5.3). These features are the same for all
documents si corresponding to a given conﬁguration
{u, B, q, S(q), C(q)}.
Their employment helps personalization for two rea-
sons. First, the averaged features give the evidence on

--- Page 6 ---
Table 2: List of features used in predicting SERP clicks. Coverage is the fraction of records with available
data for the feature.
Feature name
Feature description
Coverage
Characteristics of a query
1
NumDocs(q)
Number of documents found for a given query
100%
2
Nav(q)
Probability that query q is navigational
100%
3
NumWords(q)
Number of words in q
100%
4
CatEntropy(q)
Entropy of categories of SERP pages
100%
Characteristics of the current browsing session and its individual pages
5
Time(bj)
Time spent on page bi
100%
6
BrowseTime(bj)
Time spent in the browser after viewing bi prior to formulating a query
100%
7
Pq(bj)
Probability of formulating any query after visiting bi
100%
8
BrLen
Length of the browsing session
100%
9
Leaves
Number of leaves in the browse graph i.e. pages without outbound links
100%
10
Links
Number of links followed during the browsing session
100%
11
Deg(bj)
Number of outbound links followed by the user on page bj
100%
12
Deg(hbj)
Number of outbound links followed by the user on host hbj
100%
Click-through-based proximity between si and bj, j ∈1, . . . K
13
log PO(si|bj)
Log of probability of browsing during the session to si after being on
bj
7%
14
log PU(si|bj)
Log of probability of browsing during the session to or from si being
on bj
8%
15
log PO(hsi|hbj)
Log of probability of browsing during the session to host hsi after being
on hbj
55%
16
log PU(hsi|hbj)
Log of probability of browsing during the session to or from host hsi
being on hbj
60%
17
PmiO(bj, si)
PMI of coocurrence of bj and si in the same order
7%
18
PmiU(bj, si)
PMI of coocurrence of bj and si in any order
8%
19
PmiO(hbj, hsi)
PMI of coocurrence of hosts of bj and si in the same order
55%
20
PmiU(hbj, hsi)
PMI of coocurrence of hosts of bj and si in any order
60%
21
I(si = bj)
Sites si and bj are the same
100%
22
I(hsi = hbj)
Hosts of si and bj are the same
100%
Click-through-based proximity between si and the whole B
23
maxK
j=1 log PO(si|bj)
The maximal value of log PO(si|bj) over bj
100%
24
maxK
j=1 log PU(si|bj)
The maximal value of log PU(si|bj) over bj
100%
25
maxK
j=1 log PO(hsi|hbj)
The maximal value of log PO(hsi|hbj) over bj
100%
26
maxK
j=1 log PU(hsi|hbj)
The maximal value of log PU(hsi|hbj) over bj
100%
27
maxK
j=1 PmiO(bj, si)
The maximal value of PmiO(bj, si) over bj
100%
28
maxK
j=1 PmiU(bj, si)
The maximal value of PmiU(bj, si) over bj
100%
29
maxK
j=1 PmiO(hbj, hsi)
The maximal value of PmiO(hbj, hsi) over bj
100%
30
maxK
j=1 PmiU(hbj, hsi)
The maximal value of PmiU(hbj, hsi) over bj
100%
External features
31
Pos(si)
Position of si on SERP, namely i
100%
32
Rel(si)
Relevance of si predicted by the search engine
100%
Feature averages over S(q)
33-42
AvF
Averages of features 13-22 over documents si ∈S(q)

--- Page 7 ---
how good si is in comparison with other documents:
the fact some feature F(si) is “better” than on aver-
age, i.e F(si) > AvF(si) indicates that si should be
promoted in the ranking list.
Second, averaged fea-
tures measure the relation between browsing session B
and query q. For instance, large value of AvPO(si|bj)
implies large number of browsing sessions containing
page bj and some page from S(q), therefore bj is likely
to be related to q.
Features 5, 6, 7, 11-22 were computed for each j ∈1, . . . K.
Afterwards they were averaged over the most resent k browsed
pages bj for each k ≤K. For example, feature log PO(si|bj)
results into K features:
log PO(si|b1),
1
2(log PO(si|b1) + log PO(si|b2)),
. . . ,
1
K (log PO(si|b1) + · · · + log PO(si|bK)).
Thus, each feature 14-23 and its analogue among features
33-42 results into K features. If there are l browsed pages
and l < 10 for a given conﬁguration, then we put aver-
ages over all l browsed documents instead of averages over
k > l documents into the ﬁnal feature vector.
This re-
sults into 17 + 25 · K features, depending on the number of
browsed pages under consideration. To measure the value
of the browsing context, we collect the set of features for
each K = 1, . . . , 10 and train 10 separate personalization
algorithms.
7.
EXPERIMENTS
7.1
Evaluation
During the evaluation step we compare our re-ranking al-
gorithm with the baseline — non-personalized ranking of a
commercial search engine. We stress that commercial en-
gine is highly tuned, thus any (even relatively small) sig-
niﬁcant improvement of its results is notable achievement.
There are several common methods of re-ranking evalua-
tion.
One way is to run some online comparison test i.e.
present to users both rankings (e.g. interleaved, side by side
or via AB-testing [13, 11, 10]) and measure their prefer-
ences. However, since presenting possibly inferior results to
users is highly undesirable, it should be supported by strong
evidence originating from a certain oﬄine evaluation step.
In our study we have conducted oﬄine experiments based
on the common click-through-based evaluation, see e.g. [5,
11, 2]. In this approach we assign positive judgements ex-
actly to the results which were clicked on by a user and com-
pute some standard click metric (e.g. average ﬁrst click po-
sition, mean reciprocal rank) before and after re-ranking —
to compute the metric on a re-ranked list we assume that
the user clicks the same set of documents in spite of re-
ranking. The relative change of a click metric measures the
quality of re-ranking. The method allows eﬀective tuning
of parameters and does not require any additional judge-
ments or users’ eﬀort besides implicit relevance feedback.
However, click-through-based evaluation is known to have
certain weak points. Since users tend to click on the doc-
uments ranked higher in the result page independently on
their relevance and to skip possibly relevant result in the
bottom of the ranking list, this evaluation method just gives
the lower bound on the algorithm performance, as was also
pointed out in [16].
Rk.
Feature
Sc.
1
Pos(si)
46
2
Nav(q)
20
3
NumWords(q)
4.7
4
NumDocs(q)
1.7
5
CatEntropy(q)
0.9
6
max PmiU(hbj, hsi)
0.63
7
max log PU(hsi|hbj)
0.57
8
AvPmiU(hb2, hsi)
0.5
9
BrowseTime(b5)
0.5
10
Links
0.47
11
max PmiU(bj, si)
0.44
12
Deg(hb10)
0.44
13
Deg(hb9)
0.42
14
BrowseTime(b6)
0.42
15
Av log PU(si|b3)
0.40
Table 3: Top 15 features according to the contribu-
tion to the click prediction model.
Further we use Min Reciprocal Rank (MinRR) as the ba-
sic click metric and tune all algorithms relying on it.
MinRR = 1
Q
X
q
1
rk(si(q)),
(3)
where rk(si(q)) is the new rank of the last clicked document
for a query q. This metric is very similar to the one used
in previous works on personalization (see e.g. [16, 4]) and
gives more weight to relevant documents at the top of the
list, thus improvements at the top are more important. We
also report improvements in terms of several popular click
metrics: Mean Reciprocal Rank (MeanRR) and First Click
Position (FCP), considering all clicked documents as rele-
vant.
7.2
Click prediction
On the collected dataset we run a proprietary implemen-
tation of Friedman’s gradient boosted decision tree-based
machine learning algorithm [6]. The processed dataset, col-
lected during the 8th day, contains 500K conﬁgurations and
5M samples for learning. We divided it into 5 equal parts
on the basis of unique user ids and performed 5-fold cross
validation.
In Table 3 we report top 15 features according to the
weighted contribution into the ﬁnal click prediction model
(see [7, Section 10.13] for the description of those weights).
It measures weighted improvement of the loss function over
all employments of a feature during the learning process.
Similar method of evaluating feature strengths was used
in [4]. Apparently, Pos is the strongest feature for click pre-
diction, since it represents the relevance score of the search
engine and thus is highly correlated with the fact of a click.
Similarly, Nav is correlated with clicks on the ﬁrst result. In-
terestingly, features Deg(hb10) and Deg(hb10) are relatively
high, representing the value of the whole browsing session
for personalization
7.3
Re-ranking
In this subsection for a given set of features and the click
prediction algorithm we just reorder documents in S(q) ac-
cording to the predicted probability of a click, i.e. we do not

--- Page 8 ---
All queries
Meas. diﬀerent
+/=/-
3.5K/94K/2.5K
3.5K/0/2.5K
MinRR*
+0.05%
+3.7%
MeanRR*
+0.013%
+0.5%
FCP*
-0.18%
-1.7%
Table 4:
Improvements of click metrics (K = 10)
on the whole stream and on measurably diﬀerent
queries. *signiﬁcant with p < 0.01 (t-test).
apply any smoothing or query ﬁltering and report all metric
changes on the test log. Further we use the similar way to
analyze the beneﬁt of personalization as [2, 16]. A query q is
said to be measurably diﬀerent if the original ranking and the
personalized one have diﬀerent MinRR scores. Obviously,
the major part of queries is not aﬀected by personalization,
since the large portion of queries either has already the opti-
mal value of a click metric (like the only click at top 1), or it
is supported by a weakly relevant browsing context. How-
ever, even in this case we detect signiﬁcant improvements
of click metrics on the full query stream for all models and
aﬀect up to 6% of all queries. Interestingly, in [2] authors re-
port 5,42% of queries being aﬀected by search session-based
short-term personalization.
We re-rank documents according to the learned models
and evaluate its quality. In Table 4 we report relative change
of click metrics among all queries: min reciprocal rank, mean
reciprocal rank and ﬁrst click position. Due to proprietary
nature of our data we do not report absolute values of the
metrics. The numbers in the second column are improve-
ments on the whole dataset and the numbers in the third
column are improvements only over measurably diﬀerent
queries. Further we show how to increase the degree of im-
provement by focusing on speciﬁc queries.
7.3.1
Value of browsing context.
Now we report the impact of K — the number of pages
extracted from the browsing session for each query on the
performance of personalization. Intuitively the more pages
we consider, the better the quality of the personalized rank-
ing. At the same time we expect some saturation with the
growth of K, since distant browsed pages give less and less
new and useful information for personalization. To support
these expectations for each K = 1, . . . 10 we extract the set
of features from Section 6 and learn separate personalization
algorithm. Improvements of MinRR on measurably diﬀer-
ent queries and fractions of aﬀected queries as functions of
K are shown on ﬁgures 3 and 4 respectively. Both plots con-
ﬁrm monotonic behaviour of the functions. Thus, with the
growth of browsing context both coverage of personalization
and its quality increase. Further we consider only K = 10
as the most beneﬁcial case.
7.3.2
Impact of the query characteristics
Usually personalization is most beneﬁcial on underspec-
iﬁed ambiguous queries (like ‘MRR’), and it is widely ac-
cepted to measure its value for a search engine by analyz-
ing not the entire query ﬂow, but those hard cases [2, 16].
We evaluated our personalization independently on naviga-
tional/informational queries (according to our proprietary
classiﬁer) and on one word / two words / verbose (≥3
words) queries. Relative improvements of click metrics are
3.3 %
3.4 %
3.5 %
3.6 %
3.7 %
3.8 %
3.9 %
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
MinRR improvement on 
 measurably diﬀerent queries
The length of the browsing session (=K)
Figure 3: Performance of personalization learned on
K = 1, . . . 10 browsed pages with 95% conﬁdence in-
tervals.
4.8 %
5 %
5.2 %
5.4 %
5.6 %
5.8 %
6 %
6.2 %
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
Fraction of measurably diﬀerent queries
The length of the browsing session (=K)
Figure 4: Fraction of measurably diﬀerent queries
for personalization learned on K = 1, . . . 10 browsed
pages with 95% conﬁdence intervals.
Words
Meas. diﬀ.%
MinRR
MeanRR
FCP
1
4%
+5.2%
+1.6%
-3.7%
2
5.5%
+4.4%
+0.9%
-2.3%
≥3
6.8%
+3.1%
+0.16%
-0.96%
IsNav
Meas. diﬀ.%
MinRR
MeanRR
FCP
+
2%
+5.3%
+1.5%
-4%
-
7%
+3.6%
+0.4%
-1.4%
Table 5: Performance of personalization on various
sets of queries.
Relative improvements are com-
puted on the measurably diﬀerent conﬁgurations.
All improvements over baseline are signiﬁcant with
p = 0.01.

--- Page 9 ---
Rank
Feature
Contribution
1
NumWords(q)
7.5
2
NumDocs(q)
6.0
3
CatEntropy(q)
4.2
4
Nav(q)
3.1
5
BrowseTime(b1)
2.7
6
Pq(b1)
2.0
7
Time(b3)
1.8
8
AvPmiU(hb9, hsi)
1.8
9
AvPmiU(hb1, hsi)
1.7
10
Av log PU(si|b1)
1.6
Table 6: Top 10 features according to the contribu-
tion to the query ﬁltering model
reported in Table 5. All improvements are reported on mea-
surably diﬀerent queries.
As we expected, the one word queries receive signiﬁcantly
more gain than any other class of queries, because of their
ambiguity. Expectedly, portion of navigational queries af-
fected by personalization is relatively small. Though, sur-
prisingly, its improvement (on measurably diﬀerent queries)
even more than for non-navigational queries. Reported met-
ric improvements are comparable with other works on per-
sonalization, see e.g. [16, 4].
7.4
Query ﬁltering
We use every click prediction model learned on one of the
10 training folds to measure the change of MRR on the con-
ﬁgurations from the corresponding validation fold. On this
data we learn and tune query ﬁltering using gradient boost-
ing decision tree learning approach. The resulting function
f(u, d, q, S) estimates expected gain from the personaliza-
tion for the corresponding conﬁguration.
7.4.1
Feature contribution into the query ﬁltering
In Table 6 we report contributions of top 10 features to
the performance of the query ﬁltering model f(·).
Char-
acteristics of a query are still the most important for the
query ﬁltering model. Expectedly, features of the most re-
cent browsed page b1 are more valuable then others.
7.4.2
Impact of smoothing and query ﬁltering
Personalization of search often harms the quality of rank-
ing, thus one needs some tools to control its aggressiveness.
We have implemented two methods: smoothing from Equa-
tion (2) and query ﬁltering from Section 5.3.
The smoothing just levels out the impact of re-ranking on
all conﬁgurations and gives more weight to the original rank-
ing. This approach reduces detriment of re-ranking, though
it is not much known about its inﬂuence on the set of queries
still aﬀected by personalization. The extent of smoothing is
controlled by parameter µ. On the contrary, query ﬁltering
does not change re-ranking, but bounds the volume of con-
ﬁgurations aﬀected by personalization. To tune and control
it, one chooses threshold θ and applies re-ranking to conﬁg-
uration {u, d, q, S}, if and only if f(u, d, q, S) > θ.
Dependence of re-ranking performance on smoothing pa-
rameter is not as interesting, thus instead we report its de-
pendence on a portion of measurably diﬀerent conﬁgura-
tions. On Figure 5 we demonstrate two plots: performance
of the smoothing and the query ﬁltering as functions of a
3 %
3.5 %
4 %
4.5 %
5 %
5.5 %
0 %
1 %
2 %
3 %
4 %
5 %
6 %
MinRR improvement 
 on measurably diﬀerent queries
Portion of measurably diﬀerent queries
Filtering
Fusion
Figure 5: Impact of the volume of queries aﬀected
by re-ranking on the MRR performance.
0 %
0.5 %
1 %
1.5 %
2 %
2.5 %
3 %
-4
-3
-2
-1
1
2
3
4
Portion of documents
Rank diﬀerence
Portion of measurably
diﬀerent conﬁgurations
6%
2%
1%
Figure 6: Histogram of rank diﬀerences.
portion of aﬀected queries. Again we compute performance
only on measurably diﬀerent conﬁgurations. Maximal por-
tion is achieved at µ = 0 (respectively θ = −∞) and it is
equal to 6%. By increasing µ (resp. θ) we reduce the volume
of measurably diﬀerent conﬁgurations and move from the
right to the left on the plot. While smoothing (blue points)
is rather noisy and performs almost equally on all portions of
queries, the ﬁltering (red line) method signiﬁcantly increases
its performance on the aﬀected conﬁgurations.
Therefore
query ﬁltering eﬀectively identiﬁes the queries that beneﬁt
from re-ranking and signiﬁcantly advances the quality of the
standard Borda fusion.
7.5
Re-ranking variance
Besides average improvement of a click metric (e.g. MRR)
it is crucial to control its variance. As in the previous re-
searches [16, 11] we plot a histogram of rank diﬀerences,
see Figure 6. It demonstrates the distribution of gains and
losses in positions of clicked documents. To compare these
distributions with previous computations, we perform also
query ﬁltering and reduce portion of measurably diﬀerent
conﬁgurations from maximum 6% to 2% and 1%.
On the x axis we have diﬀerence of the original rank of
a document and the rank after personalization, on y axis
we have the portion of documents with given rank change
among all documents with non-zero rank change. The his-
togram shows that personalization is more aggressive on
the conﬁgurations that pass ﬁltering. It is expected, since

--- Page 10 ---
these are exactly conﬁgurations with maximal possible ben-
eﬁt from personalization.
8.
CONCLUSIONS
In the current paper we developed a framework for person-
alization based on the short-term browsing context. Main
target of this personalization are queries with the lack of
short-term search session context, particularly, the ﬁrst queries
in the search sessions.
We show, that, in the absence of
the previous searches, the previously browsed pages provide
a rich contextual data for the current query. Our person-
alization algorithm comprises several orthogonal types of
features and ﬁnally aﬀects up to 6% of queries.
The al-
gorithm demonstrates signiﬁcant improvements of the ba-
sic click metrics over the competitive baseline on the real
browsing log.
To avoid undesirable harm of personaliza-
tion on certain queries, we explore the problem of prelimi-
nary query ﬁltering and construct a framework for automatic
model-speciﬁc query ﬁltering. This ﬁltering advances a com-
mon smoothing method and signiﬁcantly increases metrics
on the impacted queries. As well as the most of the context-
aware re-ranking algorithms our method has the largest po-
tential for improvement on one word queries and informa-
tional queries.
Our study can be developed in several directions. First,
it will be interesting to estimate the range of applicability
of ﬁltering methods and evaluate them for other re-ranking
algorithms. Second, the present work touches on the prob-
lem of query formulation rationales. That is, prediction of
the appearance of an information need during the browsing
session and detection of the dissatisfaction with the current
browsing session. In this study we have employed just sev-
eral simple statistics to measure the probability of switching
from a browsing session to a search session, so in the future
we are planning to develop a more complicated approach to
predict the emergence of an information need.
9.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Ageev, Q. Guo, D. Lagun, and E. Agichtein. Find
it if you can: a game for modeling diﬀerent types of
web search success using interaction data. SIGIR ’11,
pages 345–354, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[2] P. N. Bennett, R. W. White, W. Chu, S. T. Dumais,
P. Bailey, F. Borisyuk, and X. Cui. Modeling the
impact of short- and long-term behavior on search
personalization. SIGIR ’12, pages 185–194, New York,
NY, USA, 2012. ACM.
[3] P. Boldi, F. Bonchi, C. Castillo, D. Donato, A. Gionis,
and S. Vigna. The query-ﬂow graph: model and
applications. CIKM ’08, pages 609–618, New York,
NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[4] K. Collins-Thompson, P. N. Bennett, R. W. White,
S. de la Chica, and D. Sontag. Personalizing web
search results by reading level. CIKM ’11, pages
403–412, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[5] Z. Dou, R. Song, and J.-R. Wen. A large-scale
evaluation and analysis of personalized search
strategies. WWW ’07, pages 581–590, New York, NY,
USA, 2007. ACM.
[6] J. H. Friedman. Stochastic gradient boosting. Comput.
Stat. Data Anal., 38(4):367–378, Feb. 2002.
[7] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. H. Friedman. The
elements of statistical learning: data mining,
inference, and prediction: with 200 full-color
illustrations. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001.
[8] D. Jiang, K. W.-T. Leung, and W. Ng. Context-aware
search personalization with concept preference. CIKM
’11, pages 563–572, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[9] R. Jones and K. L. Klinkner. Beyond the session
timeout: automatic hierarchical segmentation of
search topics in query logs. CIKM ’08, pages 699–708,
New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[10] R. Kohavi, A. Deng, B. Frasca, R. Longbotham,
T. Walker, and Y. Xu. Trustworthy online controlled
experiments: ﬁve puzzling outcomes explained. KDD
’12, pages 786–794, New York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM.
[11] N. Matthijs and F. Radlinski. Personalizing web
search using long term browsing history. WSDM ’11,
pages 25–34, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[12] B. Piwowarski and H. Zaragoza. Predictive user click
models based on click-through history. In Proceedings
of the sixteenth ACM conference on Conference on
information and knowledge management, CIKM ’07,
pages 175–182, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
[13] F. Radlinski, M. Kurup, and T. Joachims. How does
clickthrough data reﬂect retrieval quality? CIKM ’08,
pages 43–52, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[14] M. Rahurkar and S. Cucerzan. Predicting when
browsing context is relevant to search. SIGIR ’08,
pages 841–842, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[15] X. Shen, B. Tan, and C. X. Zhai. Context-sensitive
information retrieval using implicit feedback. SIGIR
’05, pages 43–50, New York, NY, USA, 2005. ACM.
[16] D. Sontag, K. Collins-Thompson, P. N. Bennett,
R. W. White, S. Dumais, and B. Billerbeck.
Probabilistic models for personalizing web search.
WSDM ’12, pages 433–442, New York, NY, USA,
2012. ACM.
[17] J. Teevan, S. T. Dumais, and D. J. Liebling. To
personalize or not to personalize: modeling queries
with variation in user intent. In Proceedings of the
31st annual international ACM SIGIR conference on
Research and development in information retrieval,
SIGIR ’08, pages 163–170, New York, NY, USA, 2008.
ACM.
[18] R. W. White, P. N. Bennett, and S. T. Dumais.
Predicting short-term interests using activity-based
search context. CIKM ’10, pages 1009–1018, New
York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[19] R. W. White and J. Huang. Assessing the scenic route:
measuring the value of search trails in web logs. SIGIR
’10, pages 587–594, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[20] B. Xiang, D. Jiang, J. Pei, X. Sun, E. Chen, and
H. Li. Context-aware ranking in web search. SIGIR
’10, pages 451–458, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.

