Pages: 9
--- Page 1 ---
Learning to Match Using Local and Distributed
Representations of Text for Web Search
Bhaskar Mitra∗1,2, Fernando Diaz1, and Nick Craswell1
1Microsoft, {bmitra, fdiaz, nickcr}@microsoft.com
2University College London, {bhaskar.mitra.15}@ucl.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Models such as latent semantic analysis and those based on neural
embeddings learn distributed representations of text, and match
the query against the document in the latent semantic space. In
traditional information retrieval models, on the other hand, terms
have discrete or local representations, and the relevance of a docu-
ment is determined by the exact matches of query terms in the body
text. We hypothesize that matching with distributed representations
complements matching with traditional local representations, and
that a combination of the two is favorable. We propose a novel
document ranking model composed of two separate deep neural
networks, one that matches the query and the document using a
local representation, and another that matches the query and the doc-
ument using learned distributed representations. The two networks
are jointly trained as part of a single neural network. We show that
this combination or ‘duet’ performs signiﬁcantly better than either
neural network individually on a Web page ranking task, and also
signiﬁcantly outperforms traditional baselines and other recently
proposed models based on neural networks.
1.
INTRODUCTION
Neural text embedding models have recently gained signiﬁcant
popularity for both natural language processing (NLP) and informa-
tion retrieval (IR) tasks. In IR, a signiﬁcant number of these works
have focused on word embeddings [6, 8, 10, 11, 27, 28, 35, 42] and
modelling short-text similarities [15, 16, 29, 36–38]. In traditional
Web search, the query consists of only few terms but the body text
of the documents typically has at least few hundred sentences. In
the absence of click information, such as for newly-published or
infrequently-visited documents, the body text can be a useful signal
to determine the relevance of the document for the query. Therefore,
extending existing neural text representation learning approaches to
long body text for document ranking is an important challenge in
IR. However, as was noted during a recent workshop [4], in spite
of the recent surge in interests towards applying deep neural net-
work (DNN) models for retrieval, their success on ad-hoc retrieval
tasks has been rather limited. Some recent papers [30, 35] report
worse performance of neural embedding models when compared to
traditional term-based approaches, such as BM25 [34].
Traditional IR approaches consider terms as discrete entities.
The relevance of the document to the query is estimated based on,
amongst other factors, the number of matches of query terms in the
document, the parts of the document in which the matches occur, and
the proximity between the matches. In contrast, latent semantic anal-
ysis (LSA) [5], probabilistic latent semantic analysis (PLSA) [14]
and latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) [2, 40] learn low-dimensional
∗The author is a part-time PhD student at UCL.
The President of the United States of America (POTUS) is the elected
head of state and head of government of the United States. The
president leads the executive branch of the federal government and is
the commander in chief of the United States Armed Forces. Barack
Hussein Obama II (born August 4, 1961) is an American politician
who is the 44th and current President of the United States. He is the
ﬁrst African American to hold the ofﬁce and the ﬁrst president born
outside the continental United States.
(a) Local model
The President of the United States of America (POTUS) is the elected
head of state and head of government of the United States. The
president leads the executive branch of the federal government and is
the commander in chief of the United States Armed Forces. Barack
Hussein Obama II (born August 4, 1961) is an American politician
who is the 44th and current President of the United States. He is the
ﬁrst African American to hold the ofﬁce and the ﬁrst president born
outside the continental United States.
(b) Distributed model
Figure 1: Visualizing the drop in each model’s retrieval score
by individually removing each of the passage terms for the
query “united states president”. Darker green signiﬁes bigger
drop. The local model uses only exact term matches. The dis-
tributed model uses matches based on a learned representation.
vector representations of terms, and match the query against the doc-
ument in the latent semantic space. Retrieval models can therefore
be classiﬁed based on what representations of text they employ at the
point of matching the query against the document. At the point of
match, if each term is represented by a unique identiﬁers (local rep-
resentation [13]) then the query-document relevance is a function of
the pattern of occurrences of the exact query terms in the document.
However, if the query and the document text is ﬁrst projected into a
continuous latent space, then it is their distributed representations
that are compared. Along these lines, Guo et al. [12] classify recent
DNN models for short-text matching as either interaction-focused
[12, 15, 22, 31] or representation-focused [15, 16, 36–38]. They
claim that IR tasks are different from NLP tasks, and that it is more
important to focus on exact matching for the former and on learning
text embeddings for the latter. Mitra et al. [27], on the other hand,
claim that models that compare the query and the document in the
latent semantic space capture a different sense of relevance than
models that focus on exact term matches, and therefore the combina-
tion of the two is more favorable. Our work is motivated by the latter
intuition that it is important to match the query and the document
using both local and distributed representations of text. We propose
arXiv:1610.08136v1  [cs.IR]  26 Oct 2016

--- Page 2 ---
a novel ranking model comprised of two separate DNNs that model
query-document relevance using local and distributed representa-
tions, respectively. The two DNNs, referred to henceforth as the
local model and the distributed model, are jointly trained as part of
a single neural network, that we name as a duet architecture because
the two networks co-operate to achieve a common goal. Figure
1 demonstrates how each subnetwork models the same document
given a ﬁxed query. While the local model captures properties like
exact match position and proximity, the distributed model detects
property synonyms (e.g. ‘Obama’), related terms (e.g. ‘federal’),
and even wellformedness of content (e.g. ‘the’, ‘of’)1.
In this paper, we show that the duet of the two DNNs not only
outperforms the individual local and distributed models, but also
demonstrate large improvements over traditional baselines and other
recently proposed models based on DNNs on the document ranking
task. Unlike many other work, our model signiﬁcantly outperforms
classic IR approaches by using a DNN to learn text representation.
DNNs are known for requiring signiﬁcant training data, and most
of the state-of-the-art performances achieved by these deep mod-
els are in areas where large scale corpora are available for training
[19, 20]. Some of the lack of positive results from neural models in
the area of ad-hoc retrieval is likely due to the scarce public avail-
ability of large quantity of training data necessary to learn effective
representations of text. In Section 6, we will present some analysis
on the effect of training data on the performance of these DNN mod-
els. In particular, we found that–unsurprisingly–the performance
of the distributed model improves drastically in the presence of
more data. Unlike some previous work [16, 37, 38] that train on
clickthrough data with randomly sampled documents as negative ex-
amples, we train our model on human-judged labels. Our candidate
set for every query consists of documents that were retrieved by the
commercial search engine Bing, and then labelled by crowdsourced
judges. We found that training with the documents that were rated
irrelevant by the human judges as the negative examples is more
effective than randomly sampling them from the document corpus.
To summarize, the key contributions of this work are:
1. We propose a novel duet architecture for a model that jointly
learns two deep neural networks focused on matching using
local and distributed representations of text, respectively.
2. We demonstrate that this architecture out-performs state-of-
the-art neural and traditional non-neural baselines.
3. We demonstrate that training with documents judged as irrele-
vant as the negative examples is more effective than randomly
sampling them from the corpus.
2.
DESIDERATA OF DOCUMENT RANK-
ING
Before describing our ranking model, we ﬁrst present three prop-
erties found across most effective retrieval systems. We will then
operationalize these in our architecture in Section 3.
First, exact term matches between the query and the document
are fundamental to all information retrieval models [7]. Traditional
IR models such as BM25 [34] are based on counts of exact matches
of query terms in the document text. They can be employed with
minimal (or no) need for training data, sometimes directly on new
tasks or corpora. Exact matching can be particularly important when
the query terms are new or rare. For example, if new documents
appear on the Web with the television model number ‘SC32MN17’
1While surprising, this last property is important for detecting qual-
ity web content [43].
Query: big deal derby carpet
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
✗
Query: rosario trainer
1
1000
Document terms
rosario
trainer
rosario
trainer
rosario
trainer
Big
Deal
Derby
carpet
Big
Deal
Derby
carpet
Big
Deal
Derby
carpet
Figure 2: Visualizing patterns of query term matches in docu-
ments. Query terms are laid out along the vertical axis, and the
document terms along the horizontal axis. The short vertical
lines correspond to exact matches between pairs of query and
document terms. For both of the above queries, the ﬁrst doc-
ument was rated relevant by a human judge and the following
two as irrelevant.
then BM25 can immediately retrieve these pages containing pre-
cisely that model number without adjusting any parameters of the
ranking model. A good ranking model needs to take advantage of
exact matches to perform reliably on fresh and rare queries.
Second, match positions of query terms in the document not
only reﬂect where potentially relevant parts of the document are
localized (e.g. title, ﬁrst paragraph, closing paragraph) but also
how clustered individual query term matches are with each other.
Figure 2 shows the position of matches on two different queries and
a sample of relevant and non-relevant documents. In the ﬁrst query,
we see that query term matches in the relevant document are much
more clustered than in the non-relevant documents. We observe
this behavior in the second query but also notice that the clustered
matches are localized near the beginning of the relevant document.
Match proximity serves as a foundation for effective methods such
as sequential dependence models [23].
Finally, inexact term matches between the query and the document
refer to techniques for addressing the vocabulary mismatch problem.
The main disadvantage of term matching is that related terms are
ignored, so when ranking for the query ‘Australia’ then only the term
frequency of ‘Australia’ is considered, even though counting terms
like ‘Sydney’ and ‘koala’ can be good positive evidence. Robertson
[33] pointed out that under the probabilistic model of IR there is, in
fact, no good justiﬁcation for ignoring the non-matching terms in
the document. Furthermore, Mitra et al. [27] demonstrated that a
distributed representation based retrieval model that considered all
document terms is able to better distinguish between a passage that is
truly relevant to the query “Cambridge” from a passage on a different
topic (e.g., giraffes) with artiﬁcially injected occurrences of the term
“Cambridge”. Any IR model that considers the distribution of non-
matching terms is therefore likely to beneﬁt from this additional
evidence, and be able to tell “Cambridge” apart from “an African
even-toed ungulate mammal”.
In practice, the most effective techniques leverage combinations
of these techniques. Dependence models combine exact matching
with proximity [23]. LDA-based document models combine exact
matching with inexact matching [40]. Query hypergraphs capture
all three [1]. Our method also combines these techniques but, un-
like prior work, jointly learns all free parameters of the different

--- Page 3 ---
components.
3.
THE DUET ARCHITECTURE
Figure 3 provides a detailed schematic view of the duet architec-
ture. The distributed model projects the query and the document text
into an embedding space before matching, while the local model
operates over an interaction matrix comparing every query term to
every document term. The ﬁnal score under the duet setup is the
sum of scores from the local and the distributed networks,
f(Q, D) = fℓ(Q, D) + fd(Q, D)
(1)
where both the query and the document are considered as ordered
list of terms, Q = [q1, . . . , qnq] and D = [d1, . . . , dnd]. Each
query term q and document term d is a m × 1 vector where m is
the input representation of the text (e.g. the number of terms in the
vocabulary for the local model). We ﬁx the length of the inputs
across all queries and documents such that we consider only the
ﬁrst 10 terms in the query and the ﬁrst 1000 in the document. If
the either is shorter than the target dimension, the input vectors are
padded with zeros. The truncation of the document body text to the
ﬁrst 1000 terms is performed only for our model variants. For all
the neural and non-neural baseline models we consider the full body
text.
3.1
Local Model
The local model estimates document relevance based on patterns
of exact matches of query terms in the document. To this end, each
term is represented by its one-hot encoding in a mℓ-dimensional
space, where mℓis the size of the vocabulary. The model then
generates the nd × nq binary matrix X = DTQ, capturing every
exact match (and position) of query terms in the document. This
interaction matrix, without the zero-padding, is analogous to the
visual representation of term matches in Figure 2, and therefore
captures both exact term matches and match positions. It is also
similar to the indicator matching matrix proposed previously by
Pang et al. [31]. While interaction matrix X perfectly captures every
query term match in the document, it does not retain information
about the actual terms themselves. Therefore, the local model cannot
learn term-speciﬁc properties from the training corpus, nor model
interactions between dissimilar terms.
The interaction matrix X is ﬁrst passed through a convolutional
layer with c ﬁlters, a kernel size of nd × 1, and a stride of 1. The
output Zi corresponding to the ith convolutional window over X
is a function of the match between the qi term against the whole
document,
Zi = tanh

XT
i W

(2)
where Xi is row i of X, tanh is performed elementwise, and the
nd × c matrix W contains the learnable parameters of the convolu-
tional layer. The output Z of the convolutional layer is a matrix of
dimension c × nq. We use a ﬁlter size (c) of 300 for all the evalua-
tions reported in this paper. The output of the convolutional layer
is then passed through two fully-connected layers, a dropout layer,
and a ﬁnal fully-connected layer that produces a single real-valued
output. All the nodes in the local model uses the hyperbolic tangent
function for non-linearity.
3.2
Distributed Model
The distributed model learns dense lower-dimensional vector rep-
resentations of the query and the document text, and then computes
the positional similarity between them in the learnt embedding space.
Instead of a one-hot encoding of terms, as in the local model, we use
Interaction Featurizer 
1000 x 10 
(binary) 
Convolution (1000 x 1) 
300 x 10 
Fully Connected 
300 
Fully Connected 
300 
Dropout 
300 
Fully Connected 
1 
Trigraph Featurizer 
2000 x 10 
(counts) 
Convolution (2000 x 3) 
300 x 8 
Max Pooling (1 x 8) 
300 
Fully Connected 
300 
Trigraph Featurizer 
2000 x 1000 
(counts) 
Convolution (2000 x 3) 
300 x 998 
Max Pooling (1 x 100) 
300 x 899 
Convolution (300 x 1) 
300 x 899 
Hadamard Product 
300 x 899 
Fully Connected 
300 
Fully Connected 
300 
Dropout 
300 
Fully Connected 
1 
Sum 
Query 
Document 
Query 
Document 
local model 
distributed model 
Figure 3: The duet architecture composed of the local model
(left) and the distributed model (right). The local sub-network
takes an interaction matrix of query and document terms as
input, whereas the distributed sub-network learns embeddings
of the query and document text before matching.
a character n-graph based representation of each term in the query
and document. Our n-graph based input encoding is motivated by
the trigraph encoding proposed by Huang et al. [16]. For each term,
we count all of the n-graphs present for 1 ≤n ≤G. We then use
this n-graph frequency vector of length md to represent the term.
Instead of directly computing the interaction between the md×nq
matrix Q and the md × nd matrix D, we ﬁrst learn a series of non-
linear transformations to the character-based input. For both query
and document, the ﬁrst step is convolution. The md × 3 convolution
window has ﬁlter size of 300. It projects 3 consecutive terms to
a 300 dimensional vector, then takes a stride by 1 position, and
projects the next 3 terms, and so on. For the query, the convolution
step generates a tensor of dimensions 300 × 8. For document it
generates one of dimensions 300 × 998.
Following this, we conduct a max-pooling step. For the query the
pooling kernel dimensions are 1 × 8. For document it is 1 × 100.

--- Page 4 ---
As a result, we get one 300 × 1 matrix ˜Q for the query and a
300 × 899 matrix ˜D for the document. The document matrix ˜D can
be interpreted as 899 separate embeddings, each corresponding to
different equal-sized spans of text within the document. Our choice
of a window-based max-pooling strategy, instead of global max-
pooling as employed by CDSSM [38], is motivated by the fact that
the window-based approach allows the model to distinguish between
matches in different parts of the document. As posited in Section 2,
a model that is aware of match positions may be more suitable when
dealing with long documents, especially those containing mixture
of many topics.
The output of the max-pooling layer for the query is then passed
through a fully-connected layer. For the document, the 300 × 899
dimensional matrix output is operated on by another convolutional
layer with ﬁlter size of 300, kernel dimensions of 300 × 1, and a
stride of 1. The combination of these convolutional and max-pooling
layers enable the distributed model to learn suitable representations
of text for effective inexact matching.
In order to perform the matching, we conduct the element-wise
or Hadamard product between the embedded document matrix and
the extended or broadcasted query embedding,
˜X = ( ˜Q . . . ˜Q
| {z }
899 times
) ◦˜D
(3)
After this, we pass the matrix through fully connected layers, and
a dropout layer until we arrive at a single score. Similar to the local
model, we use hyperbolic tangent function here for non-linearity.
3.3
Optimization
Each training sample consists of a query Q, a relevant document
D∗and a set of irrelevant documents N = {D0, . . . , DN}. We
use a softmax function to compute the posterior probability of the
positive document given a query based on the score.
p(D∗|Q) =
exp(f(Q, D∗))
P
D∈N exp(f(Q, D))
(4)
and we maximize the log likelihood log p(D∗|Q) using stochas-
tic gradient descent.
4.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
We conducted three experiments to test: (1) the effectiveness
of our duet model compared to the local and distributed models
separately, and (2) the effectiveness of our duet model compared
to existing baselines for content-based web ranking, (3) the effec-
tiveness of training with judged negative documents compared to
random negative documents. In this section, we detail our experi-
ment setup and baseline implementations.
4.1
Data
The training dataset consisted of 199,753 instances in the format
described in Section 4.2. The queries in the training dataset were
randomly sampled from Bing’s search logs from a period between
January, 2012 and September, 2014. Human judges rated the docu-
ments on a ﬁve-point scale (perfect, excellent, good, fair and bad).
The document body text was retrieved from Bing’s Web document
index. We used proprietary parsers for extracting the body text from
the raw HTML content. All the query and the document text were
normalized by down-casing and removing all non-alphanumeric
characters.
Table 1: Statistics of the three test sets randomly sampled from
Bing’s search logs. The candidate documents are generated by
querying Bing and then rated using human judges.
queries
documents
documents
query
training
199,753
998,765
5
weighted
7,741
171,302
24.9
unweighted
6,808
71,722
10.6
We considered two different test sets, both sampled from Bing
search logs. The weighted set consisted of queries sampled ac-
cording their frequency in the search logs. As a result, frequent
queries were well-represented in this dataset. Queries were sampled
between October, 2014 and December, 2014. The unweighted set
consisted of queries sampled uniformly from the entire population
of unique queries. The queries in this samples removed the bias
toward popular queries found in the weighted set. The unweighted
queries were sampled between January, 2015 and June, 2015.
Because all of our datasets were derived from sampling real query
logs and because queries will naturally repeat, there was some over-
lap in queries between the training and testing sets. Speciﬁcally,
14% of the testing queries in the weighted set occurred in the train-
ing set, whereas only 0.04% of the testing queries in the unweighted
set occurred in the training set. We present both results for those
who may be in environments with repeated queries (as is common
in production search engines) and for those who may be more in-
terested in cold start situations or tail queries. Table 1 summarizes
statistics for the two test sets.
4.2
Training
Besides the architecture (Figure 3), our model has the following
free parameters: the maximum order of the character-based rep-
resentation for the distributed model (G), the number of negative
documents to sample at training time (N), the dropout rate, and the
learning rate.
We used a maximum order of ﬁve for our character n-graphs in the
distributed model. Instead of using the full 62,193,780-dimensional
vector, we only considered top 2,000 most popular n-graphs, result-
ing 36 unigraphs (a-z and 0-9), 689 bigraphs, 1149 trigraphs, 118
4-graphs, and eight 5-graphs.
When training our model (Section 3.3), we sampled four negative
documents for every one relevant document. More precisely, for
each query we generated a maximum of one training sample of
each form, (1) One excellent document with four fair documents
(2) One excellent document with four bad documents (3) One good
document with four bad documents. Pilot experiments showed that
treating documents judged as fair or bad as the negative examples
resulted in signiﬁcantly better performance, than when the model
was trained with randomly sampled negatives. For training, we
discarded all documents rated as perfect because a large portion of
them fall under the navigational intent, which can be better satisﬁed
by historical click based ranking signals.
The dropout rate and the learning rate were set to 0.20 and 0.01,
respectively, based on a validation set. We implemented our model
using CNTK [41] and trained the model with stochastic gradient
descent based optimization (with automatic differentiation) on a
single GPU. It was necessary to use a small minibatch size of 8 to
ﬁt the whole data in GPU memory.2
2We will publicly release a CNTK implementation of our model by

--- Page 5 ---
4.3
Baselines
Our baselines capture the individual properties we outlined in
Section 2. Exact term matching is effectively performed by many
classic information retrieval models. We used the Okapi BM25 [34]
and query likelihood (QL) [32] models as representative of this class
of model. We used Indri3 for indexing and retrieval.
Match positions are handled by substantially fewer models. Met-
zler’s dependence model (DM) [23] provides an inference network
approach to modeling term proximity. We used the Indri implemen-
tation for our experiments.
Inexact term matching received both historic and modern treat-
ments in the literature. Deerwester et al. originally presented latent
semantic analysis (LSA) [5] as a method for addressing vocabu-
lary mismatch by projecting words and documents into a lower-
dimension latent space. The dual embedding space model (DESM)
[27, 28] computes a document relevance score by comparing ev-
ery term in the document with every query term using pre-trained
word embeddings. We used the same pre-trained word embeddings
dataset that the authors made publicly available online for down-
load4. These embeddings, for approximately 2.8M words, were
previously trained on a corpus of Bing queries. In particular, we use
the DESMIN-OUT model, which was reported to have the best per-
formance on the retrieval task, as a baseline in this paper. Both the
deep structured semantic model (DSSM) [16] and its convolutional
variant CDSSM [38] consider only the document title for matching
with the query. While some papers have reported negative perfor-
mances for title-based DSSM and CDSSM on the ad hoc document
retrieval tasks [12, 30], we included document-based variants appro-
priately retrained on the same set of positive query and document
pairs as our model. As with the original implementation we choose
the irrelevant documents for training by randomly sampling from
the document corpus. For the CDSSM model, we concatenated the
trigraph hash vectors of the ﬁrst T terms of the body text followed by
a vector that is a sum of the trigraph hash vectors for the remaining
terms. The choice of T was constrained by memory requirements,
and we pick 499 for our experiments.
The DRMM model [12] uses a DNN to perform term matching,
with few hundred parameters, over histogram-based features. The
histogram features, computed using exact term matching and pre-
trained word embeddings based cosine similarities, ignoring the ac-
tual position of matches. We implemented the DRMMLCH×IDF vari-
ant of the model on CNTK [41] using word embeddings trained on
a corpus of 341,787,174 distinct sentences randomly sampled from
Bing’s Web index, with a corresponding vocabulary of 5,108,278
words. Every training sample for our model was turned into four
corresponding training samples for DRMM, comprised of the query,
the positive document, and each one of the negative documents.
This guaranteed that both models observed the exact same pairs of
positive and negative documents during training. We adopted the
same loss function as proposed by Guo et al.
4.4
Evaluation
All evaluation and empirical analysis used the normalized dis-
counted cumulative gain (NDCG) metric computed at positions one
and ten [18]. All performance metrics were averaged over queries
for each run. Whenever testing for signiﬁcant differences in perfor-
mance, we used the paired t-test with a Bonferroni correction.
the time of publication of this paper.
3http://www.lemurproject.org/indri/
4https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=
52597
Table 2: Performance on test data. All duet runs signiﬁcantly
outperformed our local and distributed model (p < 0.05). All
duet runs also outperformed non-neural and neural baselines.
The difference between the duet model and the best performing
baseline per dataset and position (italics) is statistically signiﬁ-
cant (p < 0.05). The best NDCG performance on each dataset
and position is highlighted in bold.
NDCG@1
NDCG@10
Non-neural baselines
LSA
22.4
44.2
BM25
24.2
45.5
DM
24.7
46.2
QL
24.6
46.3
Neural baselines
DRMM
24.3
45.2
DSSM
25.8
48.2
CDSSM
27.3
48.2
DESM
25.4
48.3
Our models
Local model
24.6
45.1
Distributed model
28.6
50.5
Duet model
32.2
53.0
(a) weighted
NDCG@1
NDCG@10
Non-neural baselines
LSA
31.9
62.7
BM25
34.9
63.3
DM
35.0
63.4
QL
34.9
63.4
Neural baselines
DRMM
35.6
65.1
DSSM
34.3
64.4
CDSSM
34.3
64.0
DESM
35.0
64.7
Our models
Local model
35.0
64.4
Distributed model
35.2
64.9
Duet model
37.8
66.4
(b) unweighted
5.
RESULTS
Table 2 reports NDCG based evaluation results on two test datasets
for our model and all the baseline models. Our main observation is
that the duet model performs signiﬁcantly better than the individual
local and distributed models. This supports our underlying hypothe-
sis that matching in a latent semantic space can complement exact
term matches in a document ranking task, and hence a combination
of the two is more appropriate. Note that the NDCG numbers for the
local and the distributed models correspond to when these DNNs
are trained individually, but for the ‘duet’ the two DNNs are trained
together as part of a single neural network.

--- Page 6 ---
46
48
50
52
local
distributed
joint
judged
random
(a) Weighted set
64.5
65.0
65.5
66.0
local
distributed
joint
judged
random
(b) Unweighted set
Figure 4: The duet model demonstrates signiﬁcantly better
performance (p < 0.05) on both test sets when trained with
judged irrelevant documents as the negative examples, instead
of randomly sampling them from the document corpus. The
distributed model also shows statistically signiﬁcant gain (p <
0.05) on the weighted set, and a non-statistically signiﬁcant gain
on the unweighted set.
Among the baseline models, including both traditional and neural
network based models, CDSSM and DESM achieve the highest
NDCG at position one and ten, respectively, on the weighted test
set. On the unweighted test set DRMM is our best baseline model
at both rank positions. The duet model demonstrates signiﬁcant
improvements over all these baseline models on both test sets and at
both NDCG positions.
We also tested our independent local and distributed models
against their conceptually closest baselines. Because our local model
captures both matching and proximity, we compared performance
to dependence models (DM). While the performance in terms of
NDCG@1 is statistically indistinguishable, both of the NDCG@10
results are statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.05). We compared our
distributed model to the best neural model for each test set and
metric. We found no statistically signiﬁcant difference except for
NDCG@10 for the weighted set.
We were interested in testing our hypotheses that training with
labeled negative documents is superior to training with randomly
sampled documents presumed to be negative. We conducted an
experiment training with negative documents following each of the
two protocols. Figure 4 shows the results of these experiments.
We found that, across all of our models, using judged nonrelevant
documents was more effective than randomly sampling documents
from the corpus and considering them as negative examples.
6.
DISCUSSION
Our results demonstrated that our joint optimization of local
and distributed models provides substantial improvement over all
baselines. Although the independent models were competitive with
existing baselines, the combination provided a signiﬁcant boost.
We also conﬁrmed that using judged negative documents should
be used when available. We speculate that training with topically-
similar (but nonrelevant) documents allows the model to better
discriminate between the confusable documents provided by an
earlier retrieval stage. This sort of staged ranking, ﬁrst proposed
by Cambazoglu et al. [3], is now a common web search engine
architecture.
In Section 4.3 we described our baseline models according to
which of the properties of effective retrieval systems, that we out-
lined in Section 2, they incorporate. It is reasonable to expect that
models with certain properties are better suited to deal with certain
segments of queries. For example, the relevant Web page for the
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
1
2
3
4
5+
local
dist.
duet
(a) Model performance
by query length
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
frequent
rare
unseen
local
dist.
duet
(b) Model performance
by term rarity
Figure 5: Performance of different models by length of query
and how rare the rarest query term is in the training data. For
the rare term analysis, we place all query terms into one of ﬁve
categories based on their occurrence counts in the training data.
Then we then categorize each query in the test dataset based
on the frequency of the rarest term belongs in the query. We
include a category for queries with at least one term which has
no occurrences in the training data.
query “what channel are the seahawks on today” may contain the
name of the actual channel (e.g., “ESPN” or “FOX”) and the actual
date for the game, instead of the terms “channel” or “today”. A
retrieval model that only counts repetitions of query terms is likely
to retrieve less relevant documents for this query – compared to a
model that considers “ESPN” and “FOX” to be relevant document
terms. In contrast, the query “pekarovic land company”, which
may be considered as a tail navigational intent, is likely to be better
served by a retrieval model that simply retrieves documents con-
taining many matches for the term “pekarovic”. A representation
learning model is unlikely to have a good representation for this rare
term, and therefore may be less equipped to retrieve the correct doc-
uments. These anecdotal examples agree with the results in in Table
2 that show that on the weighted test set all the neural models whose
main focus is on learning distributed representations of text (duet
model, distributed model, DESM, DSSM, and CDSSM) perform
better than the models that only look at patterns of term matches
(local model and DRMM). We believe that this is because the DNNs
are able to learn better representations for more popular queries,
and perform particularly well on this segment. Figure 5 provides
further evidence towards this hypothesis by demonstrating that the
distributed model has a larger NDCG gap with the local model for
queries containing more popular terms, and when the number of
terms in the query is small. The duet model, however, is found to
perform better than both the local and the distributed models across
all these segments.
In order to better understand the relationship of our models to
existing baselines, we compared the per-query performance amongst
all models. We conjecture that similar models should performance
similarly for the same queries. We represented a retrieval model as a
vector where each position of the vector contains the performance of
the model on a different query. We randomly sample two thousand
queries from our weighted test set and represent all ranking models
as vectors of their NDCG values against these two thousand queries.
We visualized the similarity between models by projecting using
principal component analysis on the set of performance vectors. The
two-dimensional projection of this analysis is presented in Figure
6. The ﬁgure largely conﬁrms our intuitions about properties of
retrieval models. Models that use only local representation of terms
are closer together in the projection, and further away from models
that learn distributed representations of text. Interestingly, the plot

--- Page 7 ---
BM25
QL
DM
LSA
DSSM
CDSSM
DESM
DRMM
local
dist.
duet
Figure 6: Principal component analysis of models based on re-
trieval performance across testing queries. Models using exact
term matches (△), proximity (◦), and inexact matches (▽) are
presented. Our models are presented as black squares.
does not distinguish between whether the underlying model is based
on a neural network based or not, and only focuses on the retrieval
properties of the model.
Another interesting distinction between deep neural models and
traditional approaches is the effect of the training data size on the
performance of the model. BM25 has very few parameters and can
be applied to new corpus or task with almost no training. On the
other hand, DNNs like ours demonstrate signiﬁcant improvements
when trained with larger datasets. Figure 7 shows that the effect
of training data size particularly pronounced for the duet and the
distributed models that learns representations of text. The trends in
these plots indicate that training on even larger datasets may result
in further improvements in model performance over what is reported
in this paper. We believe this should be a promising direction for
future work.
A last consideration when comparing these models is runtime
efﬁciency. Web search engines receive tens of thousands of queries
per second. Running a deep neural model on raw body text at that
scale is a hard problem. The local sub-network of our model operates
on the term interaction matrix that should be reasonable to generate
using an inverted index. For the distributed model, it is important
to note that the 300 × 899 dimensional matrix representation of
the document, that is used to compute the Hadamard product with
the query, can be pre-computed and stored as part of the document
cache. At runtime, only the Hadamard product and the subsequent
part of the network needs to be executed. Such caching strategies, if
employed effectively, can mitigate large part of the runtime cost of
running a DNN based document ranking model at scale.
7.
RELATED WORK
Representations of data can be local or distributed. In a local
representation a single unit represents an entity, for example there
is a particular memory cell that represents the concept of a grand-
mother. That cell should be active if and only if the concept of a
grandmother is present. By contrast, in a distributed representation,
the concept of grandmother would be represented by a pattern of
active cells. Hinton et al. [13] provides an overview contrasting dis-
tributed and local representations, listing their good and bad points.
In a distributed representation, an activation pattern that has some
errors or other differences from past data can still be mapped to the
entity in question and to related entities, using a similarity function.
A local representation lacks this robustness to noise and ability to
generalize, but is better at precisely storing a large set of data.
This paper considers local and distributed representations of
queries and documents for use in Web page ranking. Our mea-
sure of ranking quality is NDCG [17], which rewards a ranker for
returning documents with higher gain nearer to the top, where gain is
determined according to labels from human relevance assessors. We
describe different ranking methods in terms of their representations
and how this should help them achieve good NDCG.
Exact term matching models such as BM25 [34] and query likeli-
hood [32] tend to rank a document higher if it has a greater number
of query term matches, while also potentially employing a variety
of smoothing, weighting and normalization approaches. Such exact
matching is done with a local representation of terms. Exact match
systems do not depend on a large training set, since they do not need
to learn a distributed representation of queries and documents. They
are useful in cases where the relevant documents contain exactly the
query terms entered by the user, including very rare or new vocab-
ulary, since new terms can be incorporated with no adjustments to
the underlying model. They can also be extended to reward matches
of query phrases and proximity [23].
To deal with the vocabulary mismatch problem that arises with
local representations, it is possible to do document ranking using a
distributed representation of terms. Mikolov et al. [24] developed
the popular word2vec embedding approach that has been used in a
number of retrieval studies. Zheng and Callan [42] use term embed-
dings as evidence for term weighting, learning regression models to
optimize weighting in a language modeling and a BM25 retrieval
model. Ganguly et al. [8] used term embeddings for smoothing
in the language modeling approach of information retrieval. Nal-
isnick et al. [28] used dual embeddings, one for document terms
and one for query terms, then ranked according to the all-pairs
similarity between vectors. Diaz et al. [6] used term embeddings
to generate query expansion candidates in the language modeling
retrieval framework, also ﬁnding better performance when training
a specialized term embedding.
Other papers incorporating word embeddings include [10, 11, 35].
Pang et al. [31] propose the use of matching matrices to repre-
sent the similarity of short texts, then apply a convolutional neural
network inspired by those in computer vision. They populate the
matching matrix using both local and distributed term representa-
tions. In the local representation, an exact match is used to generate
binary indicators of whether the ith term of one text and jth term
of the other are the same, as in our local model. In the distributed
representation, a pre-trained term embedding is used instead, pop-
ulating the match matrix with cosine or inner product similarities.
The method works for some problems with short text, but not for
document ranking [30]. However, by using the match matrix to
generate summary statistics it is possible to make the method work
well [12], which is our DRMM baseline.
These term embeddings are a learned representation of language,
but in most cases they are not learned on query-document relevance
labels. More often they are trained based on a a corpus, where a
term’s representation is learned from its surrounding terms or other
document context. The alternative, learning a representation based
on NDCG labels, is in keeping with recent progress in deep learning.
Deep models have multiple layers that learn distributed representa-
tions with multiple levels of abstraction. This kind of representation
learning, along with other factors such as the availability of large la-
beled data sets, has yielded performance improvements on a variety
of tasks such as speech recognition, visual object recognition and
object detection [20].
This paper learns a text representation end-to-end based on query-
document ranking labels. This has not been done often in related

--- Page 8 ---
42
44
46
48
50
52
Number of training samples per epoch
NDCG@10
27
28
29
210
211
212
213
214
215
216
217
Same # of total samples
Same # of epochs
QL baseline
(a) Local model
42
44
46
48
50
52
Number of training samples per epoch
NDCG@10
27
28
29
210
211
212
213
214
215
216
217
Same # of total samples
Same # of epochs
QL baseline
(b) Distributed model
42
44
46
48
50
52
Number of training samples per epoch
NDCG@10
27
28
29
210
211
212
213
214
215
216
217
Same # of total samples
Same # of epochs
QL baseline
(c) Duet model
Figure 7: We study the performance of our model variants when trained with different size datasets. For every, dataset size we train
two models – one for exactly one epoch and another one with multiple epochs such that the total number of training samples seen by
the model during training is 131,072.
work with document body text, but we can point to related papers
that use short text such as title, for document ranking or related tasks.
Huang et al. [16] learn a distributed representation of query and
title, for document ranking. The input representation is character
trigraphs, the training procedure asks the model to rank clicked
titles over randomly chosen titles, and the test metric is NDCG
with human labels. Shen et al. [37] developed a convolutional
version of the model. These are our DSSM and CDSSM baselines.
Other convolutional models that match short texts using distributed
representations include [15, 36], also showing good performance on
short text ranking tasks.
Outside of document ranking, learning text representations for
the target task has been explored in the context of other IR scenarios,
including query classiﬁcation [21], query auto-completion [26], next
query prediction [25, 39], and entity extraction [9].
8.
CONCLUSION
We propose a novel document ranking model composed of two
separate deep neural networks, one that matches using a local repre-
sentation of text, and another that learns a distributed representation
before matching. The duet of these two neural networks demon-
strated a higher performance than the solo models on the document
ranking task as well as signiﬁcant improvements over all baselines,
including both traditional IR baselines and other recently proposed
models based on shallow and deep neural networks. Our analy-
sis indicate that these models may achieve even more substantial
improvements in the future with much larger datasets.
Acknowledgements. The authors are grateful to Abdelrahman
Mohamed, Pushmeet Kohli, Emine Yilmaz, Filip Radlinski, David
Barber, David Hawking, and Milad Shokouhi for the insightful
discussions and feedback during the course of this work, and to
Frank Seide and Dong Yu for their incredible support with CNTK.
References
[1] M. Bendersky and W. B. Croft. Modeling higher-order term
dependencies in information retrieval using query
hypergraphs. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 941–950. ACM, 2012.
[2] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet
allocation. the Journal of machine Learning research, 3:
993–1022, 2003.
[3] B. B. Cambazoglu, V. Plachouras, and R. Baeza-Yates.
Quantifying performance and quality gains in distributed web
search engines. In Proceedings of the 32Nd International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’09, pages 411–418, New York,
NY, USA, 2009. ACM. .
[4] N. Craswell, W. B. Croft, J. Guo, B. Mitra, and M. de Rijke.
Neu-ir: The sigir 2016 workshop on neural information
retrieval. In Proc. SIGIR, 2016.
[5] S. C. Deerwester, S. T. Dumais, T. K. Landauer, G. W. Furnas,
and R. A. Harshman. Indexing by latent semantic analysis.
JASIS, 41(6):391–407, 1990.
[6] F. Diaz, B. Mitra, and N. Craswell. Query expansion with
locally-trained word embeddings. In Proc. ACL, 2016.
[7] H. Fang and C. Zhai. An exploration of axiomatic approaches
to information retrieval. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 480–487.
ACM Press, 2005.
[8] D. Ganguly, D. Roy, M. Mitra, and G. J. Jones. Word
embedding based generalized language model for information
retrieval. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 795–798. ACM, 2015.
[9] J. Gao, P. Pantel, M. Gamon, X. He, L. Deng, and Y. Shen.
Modeling interestingness with deep neural networks. In
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, 2014.
[10] M. Grbovic, N. Djuric, V. Radosavljevic, and N. Bhamidipati.
Search retargeting using directed query embeddings. In Proc.
WWW, pages 37–38, 2015.
[11] M. Grbovic, N. Djuric, V. Radosavljevic, F. Silvestri, and
N. Bhamidipati. Context-and content-aware embeddings for
query rewriting in sponsored search. In Proc. SIGIR, pages
383–392. ACM, 2015.
[12] J. Guo, Y. Fan, Q. Ai, and W. B. Croft. A deep relevance

--- Page 9 ---
matching model for ad-hoc retrieval. In Proc. CIKM, 2016.
[13] G. E. Hinton, J. L. McClelland, and D. E. Rumelhart. Parallel
distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of
cognition, vol. 1. chapter Distributed Representations, pages
77–109. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1986.
[14] T. Hofmann. Probabilistic latent semantic indexing. In Proc.
SIGIR, pages 50–57. ACM, 1999.
[15] B. Hu, Z. Lu, H. Li, and Q. Chen. Convolutional neural
network architectures for matching natural language
sentences. In Proc. NIPS, pages 2042–2050, 2014.
[16] P.-S. Huang, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, A. Acero, and L. Heck.
Learning deep structured semantic models for web search
using clickthrough data. In Proc. CIKM, pages 2333–2338.
ACM, 2013.
[17] K. Järvelin and J. Kekäläinen. Cumulated gain-based
evaluation of IR techniques. ACM TOIS, 20(4):422–446,
2002.
[18] K. Järvelin and J. Kekäläinen. Cumulated gain-based
evaluation of ir techniques. TOIS, 20(4):422–446, 2002.
[19] R. Jozefowicz, O. Vinyals, M. Schuster, N. Shazeer, and
Y. Wu. Exploring the limits of language modeling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1602.02410, 2016.
[20] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton. Deep learning. Nature,
521(7553):436–444, 2015.
[21] X. Liu, J. Gao, X. He, L. Deng, K. Duh, and Y.-Y. Wang.
Representation learning using multi-task deep neural
networks for semantic classiﬁcation and information retrieval.
Proc. NAACL, May 2015.
[22] Z. Lu and H. Li. A deep architecture for matching short texts.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
1367–1375, 2013.
[23] D. Metzler and W. B. Croft. A markov random ﬁeld model for
term dependencies. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 472–479. ACM,
2005.
[24] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean.
Distributed representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality. In Proc. NIPS, pages 3111–3119, 2013.
[25] B. Mitra. Exploring session context using distributed
representations of queries and reformulations. In Proc. SIGIR,
pages 3–12. ACM, 2015.
[26] B. Mitra and N. Craswell. Query auto-completion for rare
preﬁxes. In Proc. CIKM. ACM, To appear, 2015.
[27] B. Mitra, E. Nalisnick, N. Craswell, and R. Caruana. A dual
embedding space model for document ranking. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.01137, 2016.
[28] E. Nalisnick, B. Mitra, N. Craswell, and R. Caruana.
Improving document ranking with dual word embeddings. In
Proc. WWW, 2016.
[29] H. Palangi, L. Deng, Y. Shen, J. Gao, X. He, J. Chen, X. Song,
and R. Ward. Deep sentence embedding using long short-term
memory networks: Analysis and application to information
retrieval. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
Language Processing, 24(4):694–707, 2016.
[30] L. Pang, Y. Lan, J. Guo, J. Xu, and X. Cheng. A study of
matchpyramid models on ad-hoc retrieval. In Neu-IR ‘16
SIGIR Workshop on Neural Information Retrieval, 2016.
[31] L. Pang, Y. Lan, J. Guo, J. Xu, S. Wan, and X. Cheng. Text
matching as image recognition. In Proc. AAAI, 2016.
[32] J. M. Ponte and W. B. Croft. A language modeling approach
to information retrieval. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 275–281.
ACM, 1998.
[33] S. Robertson. Understanding inverse document frequency: on
theoretical arguments for idf. Journal of documentation, 60
(5):503–520, 2004.
[34] S. Robertson and H. Zaragoza. The probabilistic relevance
framework: BM25 and beyond. Now Publishers Inc, 2009.
[35] D. Roy, D. Paul, M. Mitra, and U. Garain. Using word
embeddings for automatic query expansion. In Neu-IR ‘16
SIGIR Workshop on Neural Information Retrieva, 2016.
[36] A. Severyn and A. Moschitti. Learning to rank short text pairs
with convolutional deep neural networks. In Proc. SIGIR,
pages 373–382. ACM, 2015.
[37] Y. Shen, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, and G. Mesnil. A latent
semantic model with convolutional-pooling structure for
information retrieval. In Proc. CIKM, pages 101–110. ACM,
2014.
[38] Y. Shen, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, and G. Mesnil. Learning
semantic representations using convolutional neural networks
for web search. In Proc. WWW, pages 373–374, 2014.
[39] A. Sordoni, Y. Bengio, H. Vahabi, C. Lioma, J. G. Simonsen,
and J.-Y. Nie. A hierarchical recurrent encoder-decoder for
generative context-aware query suggestion. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1507.02221, 2015.
[40] X. Wei and W. B. Croft. Lda-based document models for
ad-hoc retrieval. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 178–185. ACM, 2006.
[41] D. Yu, A. Eversole, M. Seltzer, K. Yao, Z. Huang, B. Guenter,
O. Kuchaiev, Y. Zhang, F. Seide, H. Wang, et al. An
introduction to computational networks and the computational
network toolkit. Technical report, Tech. Rep. MSR, Microsoft
Research, 2014, http://codebox/cntk, 2014.
[42] G. Zheng and J. Callan. Learning to reweight terms with
distributed representations. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 575–584.
ACM, 2015.
[43] Y. Zhou and W. B. Croft. Document quality models for web
ad hoc retrieval. In Proc. CIKM, pages 331–332. ACM Press,
2005.

