Modeling Information Need of Users in
Search Sessions
Kishaloy Halder1⋆, Heng-Tze Cheng 2, Ellie Ka In Chio 2, Georgios Roumpos 2,
Tao Wu2, and Ritesh Agarwal 2
1 School of Computing, National University of Singapore
kishaloy@comp.nus.edu.sg
2 Google Research
{hengtze,echio,roumposg,iotao,riteshag}@google.com
Abstract. Users issue queries to Search Engines, and try to ﬁnd the
desired information in the results produced. They repeat this process if
their information need is not met at the ﬁrst place. It is crucial to identify
the important words in a query that depict the actual information need
of the user and will determine the course of a search session. To this
end, we propose a sequence-to-sequence based neural architecture that
leverages the set of past queries issued by users, and results that were
explored by them. Firstly, we employ our model for predicting the words
in the current query that are important and would be retained in the
next query. Additionally, as a downstream application of our model, we
evaluate it on the widely popular task of next query suggestion. We
show that our intuitive strategy of capturing information need can yield
superior performance at these tasks on two large real-world search log
datasets.
Keywords: Query Suggestion· Query Intent
1 Introduction
In a search session, if a user’s need is not completely fulﬁlled by the results
returned by the Search Engine (SE), they tend to modify their query, and ask
again—leaving a recurring footprint of the nature query→ clicks→ query→ ...
in the logs. This set of interactions can be viewed as an exchange of information
between two agents i.e., user and SE (Figure 1). The user has an information
need which is reﬂected in the query issued by her (at time t1). The results
returned by the SE provide some (but may not be all) information relevant to
the query. We hypothesize that in this situation, the next query (at time t2)
would be dependent on the information deﬁcit that has occurred so far, i.e., the
semantic gap between the information need, and the information provided.
Important words play a crucial role in depicting the real information need
behind a search. Consider an illustration shown in Figure 2. Users tend to retain
⋆ Work done during internship at Google Research.
arXiv:2001.00861v1  [cs.IR]  3 Jan 2020

===PAGE BREAK===

2 K. Halder et al.
Fig. 1: Illustration of the user-search engine interactions. User ﬁres queries at
diﬀerent timestamps depending on the “gap” between the information need (or-
ange), and information provided (green). User ends the session when orange ≈
green.
Fig. 2: Illustration of query edit from AOL. Table on the right is the prediction
target.
the important words in the subsequent queries ( e.g., ‘check’, ‘engine’, ‘light’),
and remove the ones that are not ( e.g., ‘honda’, ‘accord’ etc). To model this
behavior, we aim to answer the following research question (RQ).
RQ: Can the information deﬁcit help in predicting the query edits?
We deﬁne query edits by means of two possibilities for every word in it i.e.,
user may (i) retain or (ii) remove a word in the next query. To answer this, in
this work we address the task of estimating the probability of retention for every
word in the current query, given the past interactions within a session. We believe
that being able to predict which words would be dropped later in the session
(‘honda’, ‘accord’ in the example shown in Figure 2) can help a search engine
focus on the core issue (‘check’, ‘engine’, ‘light’) and diversify its search results.
This will help meet a user’s information need better and faster. We propose
a novel neural encoder-decoder architecture which explores the role of evolving
information deﬁcit experienced by the user in a search session. By experimenting
with two large real-world query log datasets from AOL, and Yandex we show
that the information deﬁcit does help in predicting the query edits.
As a downstream application, we employ our model to the widely researched
next query selection task. We observe that it outperforms state-of-the-art base-
lines signiﬁcantly, indicating the untapped potential of the evolving information
need present in search sessions.
2 Related Work
Query word deletion prediction has been seen as a strategy for query rewriting
in the past [10,16]. They propose some hand-coded rules such as deletions from
“leftmost”, “rightmost” positions in the search query. Although, these methods
do not capture the query context eﬀectively [18], they present some insights

===PAGE BREAK===

Modeling Information Need of Users in Search Sessions 3
(a) Overall architecture.
 (b) Information Deﬁcit.
Fig. 3: Our model architecture with the Information Deﬁcit component. (a) Over-
all network. (b) Information Deﬁcit for the current query. We consider the sum
of the past P Information Deﬁcits w.r.t a query as the ﬁnal one.
about the nature of query modiﬁcations. Another interesting direction is re-
ducing the verbosity of queries [1,13,2,8,17]. These methods in general lack the
context of past queries in a session where users’ information needs keep evolving
after exploring some of the result pages.
Next query suggestion, and query reformulation behaviour modeling is a
heavily researched area. Early works in this domain presented the concept of
semantic similarity by looking at the queries co-occurring within a session [3],
query clustering by utilizing the query-click graph [9]. Next query formulation
is also seen as a generative task [7,4]. Unsurprisingly, the recent deep learning
based methods outperform previous heuristic based approaches. Introduced in
[14], Hierarchical Recurrent Encoder Decoder (HRED) uses two-level recurrent
neural network (RNN) to ﬁrst consider the sequence of words in a query, and the
sequence of past queries to make the prediction. Attention based networks were
also proposed which focuses on the out of vocabulary words in the query [6]. To
incorporate user feedbacks, use of memory network was proposed recently [15].
Although these models are context aware, they do not explore the relationship
between the diﬀerent contextual signals which are indicative of the users’ infor-
mation need. In our experiments we have compared our model to these systems.
3 Methods
Our model comprises two major components i.e., (i) Query Encoder, and (ii)
Information Deﬁcit Encoder as shown in Figure 3.
Query Encoder. Given a query q with n words, we use a bi-directional Gated
Recurrent Unit to encode all the words in it [5]. Following are the set of equations

===PAGE BREAK===

4 K. Halder et al.
(a) URL encoder
 (b) Encoding Sequence of Past Queries.
Fig. 4: Components in our network. (a) Architecture diagram for URL encoder.
A Character Embedding layer is used for all the characters in a URL. GRU url
encodes the sequence of characters present in it. (b) Architecture for encoding
sequence of past queries. Output of last time-step of GRU seq is considered as
the encoding of past queries.
used:
hf
i = GRUf
enc(wi, hf
i−1); hb
i = GRUb
enc(wi, hb
i+1); z = hf
n⊗ hb
1 (1)
where, wi is the ith query word, hf
n, hb
1 are the GRU encoded representations
after the ﬁnal (i.e., nth and 1st) time-steps for forward, and backward passes re-
spectively, z is the ﬁnal encoded representation of the query,⊗ denotes element-
wise multiplication operation. The encoded query( z) is repeated n times, and is
fed to GRU dec as a sequence. GRU dec yields a tensor( vi) for each time-step to
be used for ﬁnal prediction later.
Information Deﬁcit Encoder. We carefully encode two contextual signals (i)
P past queries issued by a user, and (ii) the resources she has seen in the session
so far. We combine these two signals to compute information deﬁcit. We encode
each of the past queries using the same Query Encoder as in Equation 1. We
denote the encoded representation of jth past query q−j w.r.t the current query
q as, z−j.
After issuing a query, a user tries to ﬁnd the desired information in the
results and modiﬁes her query accordingly. Ideally, content of the landing pages
should be considered as result. However, those were not available 3. We encode
the results using the component in Figure 4a. We concatenate all the urls (in
the original order) clicked against a query and consider that as a proxy for the
result. Since urls are often comprising non-standard tokens, they form a highly
sparse embedding space. To alleviate this, we consider result r as a sequence of
characters{c1, c2, ..., cm}. We use GRU url which considers a character at every
3 Most of the urls from AOL log do not exist anymore. Yandex urls are completely
anonymized.

===PAGE BREAK===

Modeling Information Need of Users in Search Sessions 5
time-step, and output of the last time-step is considered as the encoded result i.e.,
u = hurl
m where hurlk = GRUurl(ck, hurlk−1); hurlk is output after kth character
in the result. Once we have the encoded representations z−j for the jth past
query, and u−j for the results explored against it, we deﬁne the information
deﬁcit (D−j) as,
D−j = z−j⊖ u−j
where,⊖ denotes an element-wise subtraction operation. Finally, we sum up
the information deﬁcits for all the P past queries to get the overall information
deﬁcit,
D =
P∑
j=1
D−j
Final Prediction Layer. We combine the (i) current query representation,
(ii) overall information deﬁcit and (iii) an encoded representation of the past
queries to make the ﬁnal prediction. We use GRU seq to encode the sequence of
past query representations z−1, ...,z−P and denote it as s (shown in Figure 4b).
Since the ﬁnal prediction is a binary label for each word in the query, we repeat
the information deﬁcit and past query sequence tensors n times. For ith word,
we concatenate these three tensors, and pass the resultant tensor xi to the fully
connected(FC) layers to make the binary prediction.
xi = concatenate[vi,D, s]; p(yi|xi) = sof tmax(W· xi + b)
where W, and b are the weight matrices, and bias vector, respectively for the
fully connected layer; and yi is a probability distribution over two prediction
classes i.e., retention, removal for the ith word. The loss is binary cross-entropy
and the network is trained end-to-end using Adam optimizer [12].
4 Experiments
We experiment with two large datasets: (i) AOL: a US-based search engine,
widely used in the literature [6]; (ii) Yandex 4: a search engine based in Russia.
Pre-processing: To focus on the query reformulation behaviour we consider
only those queries that (i) are not the same as the subsequent query (ii) have
more than a single word (iii) are not navigational in nature i.e. do not include
http markers such as ‘www’, ‘com’ (iv) have at least one word in common with
the next query. We split all the queries (AOL ∼ 3.6M queries from 1 .5M ses-
sions, Yandex∼ 11M queries from 6 .6M sessions) into 80-10-10 proportions as
train-dev-test. We kept top 600K, 400K words as the vocabulary for AOL, and
Yandex respectively. Since Yandex urls are just anonymized ids, only top 200K
urls are kept.
4 https://www.kaggle.com/c/yandex-personalized-web-search-challenge

===PAGE BREAK===

6 K. Halder et al.
Baselines: We use some recent deep learning based query reformulation meth-
ods as competitors, Since they are not originally designed for this task, we modify
their ﬁnal prediction layers for comparison.
1. Majority Class: Every word is marked ‘retention’ forming a trivial baseline.
2. CNN-Kim [11]: A CNN without the pooling layer to predict a label for
each word.
3. GRU [5]: A vanilla GRU based sequence labeller.
4. HRED [14]: The sequence of past queries in the same session is used in this
model.
5. FMN [15]: A feedback memory network is used in this model.
The baseline hyper-parameters are set according to the respective papers.
All models were implemented using Keras with TensorFlow as the backend.
Word Retention Prediction: In this task, the objective is to predict how a
user would edit a query. Since there are two classesi.e., ‘removal’, and ‘retention’,
we calculate accuracy over all the words in a query, normalized by the query
length. We report the performances in terms of overall accuracy, and F 1 score
for the ‘removal’ class in Table 2, since the class distribution is not balanced.
Table 1 shows an illustration. The accuracy scores are presented in Table 2. We
Table 1: Illustration of accuracy computation for query word retention proba-
bility prediction task.
Current Query Next Query Ground
Truth PredictionAccuracy
japanese food for takeout asian food for takeout 0, 1, 1, 1 0, 1, 1, 0 0.75
cheap electronicsbay area cheap electronics oﬀers1, 1, 0, 0 0, 1, 0, 1 0.5
Average Accuracy 0.625
observe that our information deﬁcit based model achieves the highest accuracy
scores with 9.22% and 5.88% improvement over the majority class for the AOL,
and Yandex respectively.
Our model performs signiﬁcantly better in correctly identifying the removal
class with 4.45% and 4.87% improvement over the state-of-the-art FMN model.
The choice of baselines allows us to study the ablation eﬀect. We observe that
information deﬁcit helps in boosting the F 1 scores by 6 .81% and 4 .87% w.r.t
HRED for AOL, and Yandex respectively. The improvement with respect to
FMN is statistically signiﬁcant according to unpaired t-test with p < 0.001.
A careful reader might note that both FMN and our model use all three
input signals. However, the information deﬁcit based modelling makes a diﬀer-
ence their performances. FMN incorporates the past clicks as a separate signal
compared to the past queries. Whereas, our model assumes that both originate
from the same semantic space and uses their diﬀerence in the ﬁnal prediction
layers. It proves our hypothesis about encoding information deﬁcit explicitly in
the query reformulation process.
Next Query Selection: Finally, we employ our model to a real downstream
task i.e., next query selection in a session. The objective in this task is to select
the next query out of K most popular candidates. For each query under consid-

===PAGE BREAK===

Modeling Information Need of Users in Search Sessions 7
Table 2: Experimental results in terms of accuracy and F1 scores for the removal
class. Our model outperforms the other methods in both metrics.
Model Input Signals AOL Yandex
Last QueryPast QueriesPast ClicksAccuracy F1 Accuracy F1
1. Most Common × × × .628 – .676 –
2. CNN-Kim [11] ✓ × × .664±.0004 .36 .690±.0086 .36
3. GRU [5] ✓ × × .678±.0010 .42 .711±.0007 .40
4. HRED [14] ✓ ✓ × .684±.0011 .44 .713±.0007 .41
5. FMN [15] ✓ ✓ ✓ .683±.0005 .45 .714±.0008 .41
6. Our Model ✓ ✓ ✓ .686∗±.0006.47∗ .716∗±.0005.43∗
eration, we populate the top-K ( K = 20) co-occurred queries that to form the
candidate set, and include the ground truth next query. This is known as Most
Popular Suggestion method [14]. Standard 80-10-10 dataset splitting is used for
train-dev-test.
This task is considerably diﬀerent from the previous one. We modify the
architecture as shown in Figure 5a, keeping our core information deﬁcit compo-
nent unchanged. We encode the last query, and all the candidate queries using
the same Query Encoder ( cf. Figure 3). Note that, we need a single representa-
tion of the entire query in this case. Hence, we consider output of the last ( nth)
time-step of GRU dec as the query representation zq.
vi = GRUdec(z, vi−1); zq = vn (2)
The candidate queries (e1,··· , eK) are encoded in the same manner (z1, z2,··· , zk).
We perform element-wise multiplication between its encoded representation and
the current query to obtain the similarity, i.e., sim(q, ej) = zq⊗ zj. Again, we
concatenate the information deﬁcit, and past query tensor with each of the sim-
ilarity tensors to obtain xj = concatenate[sim(q, ej),D, s]. These (xj) are fed to
the fully-connected layer for the ﬁnal score prediction.
p(yj|xj) = sigmoid(W′· xj + b′)
where W′, and b′ are the weight and bias matrices respectively. The ground
truth score for the correct next query is 1, and 0 for the incorrect ones. We use
sigmoid as the activation function in ﬁnal layer, and mean absolute error as
the loss. During test, we consider the candidate with the maximum score as the
suggested next query,
ˆq = argmax
j={1,··· ,K}
p(yj|xj)
We evaluate the competing methods by computing Mean Reciprocal Rank
(MRR) over test queries. From the scores in Table 5b, we observe that our model
consistently outperforms the baselines across the datasets. We ﬁnd that the im-
provement with respect to FMN is statistically signiﬁcant according to unpaired
t-test with p < 0.001. In this work, we focus on the exchange of information
between a user and the Search Engine in a session to understand the information
need of the user. Our model is based on the principle that a user forms a query
depending on the information deﬁcit that takes place during search sessions.

===PAGE BREAK===

8 K. Halder et al.
(a) Model for Query Selection Task.
Model Input Signals MRR
LQ PQ PC AOL Yandex
2. CNN-Kim [11] ✓ × × .752 .621
3. GRU [5] ✓ × × .773 .636
4. HRED [14] ✓ ✓ × .814 .674
5. FMN [15] ✓ ✓ ✓ .853 .686
6. Our Model ✓ ✓ ✓ .864∗ .693∗
(b) MRR scores for the competing meth-
ods in the next query suggestion task. Our
model outperforms the baseline methods.
Fig. 5: Next Query Selection Setup. (a) Modiﬁed architecture (b) Experimental
Results.
Through a novel query word retention prediction task, and the traditional next
query selection task, we show that our hypothesis generalizes well. We experi-
ment with two query log datasets with considerably diﬀerent demographic and
temporal characteristics (e.g., one is from US, other from Russia; time diﬀerence
of 8 years between their releases) and show that our model works well in both
cases. In the future, we would like to investigate on how to use such predictive
models for converging a search session faster.
References
1. Balasubramanian, N., Kumaran, G., Carvalho, V.R.: Exploring reductions for long
web queries. In: Proc. of SIGIR. pp. 571–578. ACM (2010)
2. Bendersky, M., Croft, W.B.: Discovering key concepts in verbose queries. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 31st annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval. pp. 491–498. ACM (2008)
3. Boldi, P., Bonchi, F., Castillo, C., Donato, D., Gionis, A., Vigna, S.: The query-ﬂow
graph: model and applications. In: Proc. of CIKM. pp. 609–618. ACM (2008)
4. Cao, H., Jiang, D., Pei, J., He, Q., Liao, Z., Chen, E., Li, H.: Context-aware query
suggestion by mining click-through and session data. In: Proc. of KDD. pp. 875–
883. ACM (2008)
5. Chung, J., G¨ ul¸ cehre, C ¸ ., Cho, K., Bengio, Y.: Empirical Evaluation of Gated Re-
current Neural Networks on Sequence Modeling. In: Proc. of NIPS 2014 Deep
Learning and Representation Learning Workshop (2014)
6. Dehghani, M., Rothe, S., Alfonseca, E., Fleury, P.: Learning to attend, copy, and
generate for session-based query suggestion. In: Proc. of CIKM. pp. 1747–1756.
ACM (2017)
7. He, Q., Jiang, D., Liao, Z., Hoi, S.C., Chang, K., Lim, E.P., Li, H.: Web query
recommendation via sequential query prediction. In: Proc. of ICDE. pp. 1443–1454.
IEEE (2009)

===PAGE BREAK===

Modeling Information Need of Users in Search Sessions 9
8. Huston, S., Croft, W.B.: Evaluating verbose query processing techniques. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 33rd international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and devel-
opment in information retrieval. pp. 291–298. ACM (2010)
9. Jain, A., Ozertem, U., Velipasaoglu, E.: Synthesizing high utility suggestions for
rare web search queries. In: Proc. of SIGIR. pp. 805–814 (2011)
10. Jones, R., Fain, D.C.: Query word deletion prediction. In: Proc. of SIGIR. pp.
435–436. ACM (2003)
11. Kim, Y.: Convolutional neural networks for sentence classiﬁcation. In: Proc. of
EMNLP (2014)
12. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In: Proc. of
ICLR (2014)
13. Kumaran, G., Carvalho, V.R.: Reducing long queries using query quality predic-
tors. In: Proc. of SIGIR. pp. 564–571. ACM (2009)
14. Sordoni, A., Bengio, Y., Vahabi, H., Lioma, C., Grue Simonsen, J., Nie, J.Y.: A
hierarchical recurrent encoder-decoder for generative context-aware query sugges-
tion. In: Proc. of CIKM. pp. 553–562. ACM (2015)
15. Wu, B., Xiong, C., Sun, M., Liu, Z.: Query suggestion with feedback memory
network. In: Proc. of WWW. pp. 1563–1571 (2018)
16. Wu, H., Fang, H.: An exploration of query term deletion. In: Proc. of ECIR Work-
shop on Information Retrieval Over Query Sessions (2011)
17. Xue, X., Huston, S., Croft, W.B.: Improving verbose queries using subset distri-
bution. In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on Information
and knowledge management. pp. 1059–1068. ACM (2010)
18. Yang, B., Parikh, N., Singh, G., Sundaresan, N.: A study of query term deletion
using large-scale e-commerce search logs. In: Proc. of ECIR. pp. 235–246. Springer
(2014)