Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 7509–7525
July 9-14, 2023 ©2023 Association for Computational Linguistics
Extracting Shopping Interest-Related Product Types from the Web
Yinghao Li1∗, Colin Lockard2, Prashant Shiralkar2, Chao Zhang1
1Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA 2Amazon, Seattle, USA
1{yinghaoli,chaozhang}@gatech.edu
2{clockard,shiralp}@amazon.com
Abstract
Recommending a diversity of product types
(PTs) is important for a good shopping experi-
ence when customers are looking for products
around their high-level shopping interests (SIs)
such as hiking. However, the SI-PT connec-
tion is typically absent in e-commerce prod-
uct catalogs and expensive to construct man-
ually due to the volume of potential SIs, which
prevents us from establishing a recommender
with easily accessible knowledge systems. To
establish such connections, we propose to ex-
tract PTs from the Web pages containing hand-
crafted PT recommendations for SIs. The ex-
traction task is formulated as binary HTML
node classiﬁcation given the general obser-
vation that an HTML node in our target
Web pages can present one and only one PT
phrase. Accordingly, we introduce T RENC,
which stands for Tree-Transformer Encoders
for Node Classiﬁcation. It improves the inter-
node dependency modeling with modiﬁed at-
tention mechanisms that preserve the long-
term sibling and ancestor-descendant relations.
TRENC also injects SI into node features for
better semantic representation. Trained on
pages regarding limited SIs, T RENC is ready
to be applied to other unobserved interests. Ex-
periments on our manually constructed dataset,
WEBPT, show that T RENC outperforms the
best baseline model by 2.37 F1 points in the
zero-shot setup. The performance indicates
the feasibility of constructing SI-PT relations
and using them to power downstream applica-
tions such as search and recommendation.
1 Introduction
Customers of e-commerce websites fall in various
stages of the purchase funnel1 in their journey to
purchase speciﬁc products. While lower-funnel
customers target speciﬁc products or product cat-
egories, a customer in the middle to upper fun-
nel only has vague shopping interests (SIs) and
∗All work performed while interning at Amazon.
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Purchase_funnel
  Hiking
Guidance for new  
 As a beginner 
  - Headlamp 
  - Sun protect
What you should get
before hiking: 
  A backpack is the
primary piece of gear for
day hiking... 
The essential hiking
gear list: 
 - The safety supply is the
most important  
 - A pair of ...
Hiking equipment list: 
 - Trekking poles 
 - Long-sleeve shirt 
 - socks 
 - ...
Search Shopping Interest
Online 
Hub Pages
Product
Type
Extractor
Navigation
Footwear
Clothing
Protection
...
First-aid kit
Sunscreen
Sunglasses
Multitool
Headlamp
Animal repellent
...
Product Types Products
Search Result Presentation
Figure 1: Example of the system and results to deliver
as a response to searching for the SI “hiking”.
requires additional guidance to determine the right
products to purchase. Existing e-commerce web-
sites are limited today in their ability to assist them
in this kind of interest-oriented shopping. For ex-
ample, a customer searching for COVID-19 crisis
gets top results showing product types (PTs) such
as books and test kits, while missing other essential
categories such as the face mask, thermometer, or
medicine. Moreover, the search result is a random
assortment of products, without a clear organiza-
tion that helps upper-funnel customers discover
products within relevant categories.
The main problem is the concept of “shopping
interest” is generally absent in e-commerce cat-
alogs, which makes it difﬁcult to directly estab-
lish the SI-PT connections and give correspond-
ing recommendations. To circumvent such system
limitations, customers today are accustomed to re-
searching their products on hand-curated “hub Web
pages”2, each related to an SI and presenting PT
2E.g., hikinginthesmokys.com/hiking-checklist for hiking.
7509

===PAGE BREAK===

suggestions as organized lists, before returning to
e-commerce websites. This stretches the total time
spent on a purchase. We aim to ﬁnd SI-related
PTs directly on the e-commerce website, reducing
customer effort for all their interest-oriented needs.
Figure 1 shows the desired search experience.
The ﬁrst step to this end is collecting hub pages,
which is realized by querying Google Search with
automatically selected prompts (appendix A). The
rest of the paper focuses on PT extraction from the
HTML pages, which presents several challenges.
First, hub websites are heterogeneous in their for-
mat and terminology, with PTs often interspersed
among long descriptive paragraphs, making it chal-
lenging for any solution designed for one or a few
websites to work well for others. Second, our page
collection approach assumes that all PTs presented
on a page are related to the same SI, which may
not hold true in practice, requiring us to ﬁlter out
irrelevant PTs. Finally, our goal to ﬁnd PTs for a
wide range of SIs motivates us to consider a zero-
shot learning setup (Xian et al., 2019) w.r.t. SIs, to
generalize to interests not seen during training.
Representing an HTML document by a Docu-
ment Object Model (DOM) tree whose nodes are
HTML tags with text sequences, we formulate PT
extraction as a node classiﬁcation task that entails
checking whether its text sequence represents a PT
phrase. It is based on the empirical discovery that in
our collected hub pages, a PT phrase generally oc-
cupies a single DOM node within a coherent group
of enumerated HTML elements such as section ti-
tles or bullet points, where knowing one PT phrase
suggests the potential presence of other PT phrases
in the neighboring elements (Figure 3a). Node clas-
siﬁcation emphasizes learning inter-node structural
dependencies rather than intra-node token interac-
tions, which results in better generalization to a
wide variety of HTML structures.
Due to the absence of a dedicated DOM tree
encoding method, we propose TRENC (Tree-
Transformer Encoders for Node Classiﬁcation)
to ﬁll in the blanks. Adapted from the Trans-
former (Vaswani et al., 2017), TRENC incorpo-
rates ancestor-descendant and sibling node rela-
tions using modiﬁed self-attention mechanisms and
positional embeddings that are suited to the unique
DOM node arrangement of the rendered hub pages.
The ancestor-descendant relation provides relative
structural information between nodes in the DOM
node hierarchy, whereas the sibling relation tracks
the semantical connection among sibling nodes.
The modiﬁed attention mechanisms reconstruct the
tree architecture from the linearized input nodes
and facilitate long-term dependency modeling. To
capture the relevance between an SI and a node,
we leverage a gating network to dynamically inte-
grate SI semantics with a node’s textual semantics,
which generalizes TRENC to unseen SIs.
Evaluated on our dataset WEBPT with 453 Web
pages covering 95 interests, TRENC achieves 2.37
absolute F1 performance gain over the strongest
baseline method. Our contributions include
• a novel and practical research topic of product
type extraction from the Web pages associated
with a given shopping interest;
• TRENC , a Transformer encoder-based model
with structural attention mechanisms for recov-
ering the DOM tree architecture from the node
sequence to promote classiﬁcation;
• a dataset WEBPT, and comprehensive evalua-
tions of graph encoding techniques to verify the
effectiveness of our model design.
The dataset is made publicly accessible at
https://github.com/Yinghao-Li/WebIE to promote
future research.
2 Related Works
Web Information Extraction Information ex-
traction from the semi-structured Web data is a
long-studied topic (Chang et al., 2006; Banko et al.,
2007; Sleiman and Corchuelo, 2013). The works
most relevant to ours are those on product attribute
extraction (Zheng et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019;
Lockard et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2022; Deng et al., 2022). For example, Zheng
et al. (2018) train a BiLSTM-CRF network (Huang
et al., 2015) for each attribute to locate its cor-
responding values on text sequences. Xu et al.
(2019) scale it up by injecting the attribute name
into the network as an attention objective. Wang
et al. (2022) encode the DOM tree with graph at-
tention network (Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2018) to incor-
porate the dependencies between nodes. However,
attribute extraction is different from our PT extrac-
tion task at two major points. First, attributes are
typically extracted from product detail pages, each
of which mentions multiple attributes; and the at-
tribute name-value pairs cluster around titles, bullet
points and descriptions. In contrast, a hub page gen-
erally focuses on a single SI, with PTs scattered
throughout the page. Unlike attribute extraction
7510

===PAGE BREAK===

approaches that limit the searching scope to certain
regions, the characteristics of hub pages require us
to consider a page holistically instead of a small
part. Second, attribute extraction is performed as
token-level entity recognition in previous works,
while PT extraction requires a node-level classiﬁ-
cation, which prevents approaches for the former
from being directly applied to the latter. To our
best knowledge, no applicable DOM node classiﬁ-
cation or similar dataset exists in openly available
benchmarks such as OGB (Hu et al., 2020).
Graph Transformers Recently, graph neural
networks (GNNs) such as the graph convolutional
network (GCN, Kipf and Welling, 2017) and graph
attention network (GAT, Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2018;
Brody et al., 2022) have dominated the graph en-
coding research. But some works try to model
graphs using Transformers (Dwivedi and Bresson,
2020; Maziarka et al., 2020; Ying et al., 2021; Park
et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022), to which our work is
more related. For example, Maziarka et al. (2020)
add inter-atomic distances into the self-attention
heads to parameterize the molecular graph struc-
ture. Also targeting molecules, Graphormer (Ying
et al., 2021) takes a step further and introduces
centrality encoding, edge encoding and spacial en-
coding to evaluate the atom importance and capture
the edge and graph structure. Park et al. (2022) and
Wu et al. (2022) extend Transformers to knowl-
edge graphs with partial message-passing tricks.
Although applicable, the hierarchical and acyclic
nature of DOM trees is different from the graphs
for which the approaches were designed. Directly
applying them to DOM trees leads to sub-optimal
performance, as shown in § 5.
3 Problem Setup
We possess the DOM tree of a Web page asso-
ciated with a given shopping interest C. The
DOM tree can be represented by a set of nodes
V ={V1,V 2,...,V |V|} as well as a set of edges
E ={E1,E 2,...,E |E|} that connect the parent
and children nodes. |V| and|E| are the sizes of
node and edge sets respectively. We aim to design
a binary node classiﬁerf :V∪E∪{C}↦→{ 0, 1}|V|
to judge whether the text sequence in each node is
a phrase representing a product type. The nodes
with positive labels are referred to as “PT nodes”
and the labels are denoted byym = 1,m∈ 1 :|V|.
We focus our discussion on one DOM tree and use
m∈ 1 :|V| as its node index.
Node Embs 
Path 
Attention
Global  
Pos Embs
Add & Norm
Feed 
Forward
Add & Norm
Level 
Pos Embs
Sibling
Attention
Add & Norm
Feed 
Forward
Add & Norm
Sibling
Pos Embs
Gating
Classiﬁcation
Layer
Output logits 
Path
Attention
Branch
Sibling
Attention
Branch
Figure 2: Model structure. It adopts path and sibling at-
tention mechanisms to model the ancestor-descendant
and sibling relationships among DOM nodes.
4 Method
We propose TRENC to model the DOM tree of
hub Web pages for PT extraction. Figure 2 shows
the model architecture. We treat the problem as a
DOM node classiﬁcation task that entails detecting
whether its textual sequence deﬁnes a PT phrase.
We ﬁrst create a node representation that integrates
three basic signals of a node that may be indicative
of a PT (§ 4.1). We then adapt the Transformer
architecture by adding two attention mechanisms,
namely path attention and sibling attention, that al-
low capturing of inter-node dependencies presented
by their HTML structure (§ 4.2.1). We also include
three kinds of positional encodings that assist the
attention layers with the node’s unique positional
information within the DOM tree (§ 4.2.2). Finally,
we integrate the outputs from the path and sibling
attention layers, which are used in a classiﬁcation
layer to predict node labels (§ 4.2.3). The imple-
mentation details are in appendix B.1.
4.1 Node Features
Besides the SIC associated with the tree, we con-
sider two features for each nodeVm: 1) its HTML
tagtm∈T whereT is a ﬁnite tag set; and 2) the
text sequenceSm ={wm,1,w m,2,...,w m,|Sm|},
where|Sm| is the length andw is the token.
7511

===PAGE BREAK===

0
2
4
3
5
1
Sibling
pos idx
0
0
1
0
1
2
Level
pos idx
0
1
1
2
2
1
Global
pos idx
<root> ""
<p2> "Hiking equipment list"
<ul> ""
<li> "long-sleeve shirt"
<li> "Trekking poles"
<p2> "Contact"
PT
node?
no
no
no
yes
yes
no
(a) Example of a simple DOM tree and corresponding positional indices
Path sets
0-1
0-2-3
0-2-4
0-5
Sibling sets
0
1-2-5
3-4
Path attention mask
Sibling attention mask
0
1
3
2
5
4
0 1 2 3 4 5
0
1
3
2
5
4
0 1 2 3 4 5 (b) Node sets and attention masks
Figure 3: An example of the model inputs, including the DOM tree components, positional indices and attention
masks. The path sets and sibling sets in (b) are deﬁned by the global positional indices in (a). In the attention
masks, white elements have values 0 and the black ones are−∞.
HTML Tag HTML tags are a ﬁnite vocabulary
of keywords that deﬁne how browsers display their
content. Speciﬁcally, they convey the semantic
nature of their enclosed content. For example, <p>
denotes a paragraph, while <ul> represents a list.
Based on the observation that some tags tend to
contain PT phrases more than others, we capture
the tag information as a distinct structural feature
and encodetm with a vector tm∈ Rdmodel using
an embedding layer. Here, dmodel is the model
dimensionality as in Transformers.
Text Sequence Text sequences convey the se-
mantic character of an HTML document. In ad-
dition to directly indicating a PT phrase, they can
also serve as useful contextual information about
the neighboring nodes’ propensity to contain a PT
phrase. For example, a node stating “Essentials for
camping” is a clear indicator that what follows is
likely a set of camping-related PT nodes.
We leverage the power of pre-trained language
models (PLMs) such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)
to properly encode their semantics. For a given
sequence, BERT generates an embedding wm,i∈
RdBER T for each tokenwm,i,i∈ 1 :|Sm|, besides
two special tokenswm,0 andwm,|Sm|+1 represent-
ing the start and end of the sequence. We derive
the sequence embedding sm∈ Rdmodel by taking
an average of all the token embeddings and passing
it through a feed-forward network (FFN) layer:
sm = W seq(GELU( 1
|Sm| + 2
|Sm|+1∑
i=0
wm,i)),
(1)
where W seq∈ Rdmodel×dBER T are parameters.
Shopping Interest Although we assume that a
DOM tree is associated with only one SI C, in
rare cases this assumption does not hold. We are
thereby motivated to capture the relevance between
a node and the interest. Accordingly, we incorpo-
rateC with an embedding vector c∈ Rdmodel in a
similar manner as that for node text sequence (1),
and let the model learn the relevance between C
and related PTs to rule out any false positive cases.
Feature Integration We integrate node features
into the node embeddingem∈ Rdmodel in two steps
to honor the distinctiveness between the structural
feature tm and semantic features sm and c.
First, we merge the semantic features. Since dif-
ferent nodes have differing levels of correlations
with the interest, we use gating vectors (Hochre-
iter and Schmidhuber, 1997) to automatically con-
trol how much interest embeddings c should be
integrated into the sequence embedding sm. We
calculate the weights g as:
g(x1, x2) =σ(W1x1 + W2x2 + b), (2)
where x1 and x2 are feature vectors; W1 and W2
are trainable square matrices; b is the bias, and
σ is the sigmoid function. With (2), the updated
sequence embedding vector becomes
s′
m = g(c, sm)⊙ c + sm,
where⊙ is the element-wise product.
Then, we integrate the semantic and structural
embeddings using concatenation followed by an
FFN layer to maintain the embedding dimensional-
ity. The integrated node embedding em is
em = W emb[s′
m
T; tT
m]T,
7512

===PAGE BREAK===

where [·;·] represents vector concatenation and
W emb∈ Rdmodel×2dmodel is an FFN layer.
4.2 T RENC Architecture
Compared with conventional GNNs that generally
aggregate only1-hop neighboring messages in each
layer, Transformers are better at tracking long-term
dependencies.However, applying the Transformer
encoder to DOM trees as is can lead us astray be-
cause it is not designed to naturally accommodate
the hierarchical structure of a tree. To address this
limitation, we adapt the Transformer architecture
by adding structural attention mechanisms with
node positional encodings to better encode unique
information within the DOM trees with the existing
abilities of the Transformer architecture.
4.2.1 Structural Attentions
The DOM tree structure presents two kinds of re-
lations that convey how nodes are related. The
ancestor-descendant relation, represented by the
edgesE, conveys the granular nature of a node
(high or low) within the DOM hierarchy. The sib-
ling relation between nodes conveys how they se-
mantically represent a coherent group, as shown in
Figure 3a. We incorporate these relationships via
structural attention mechanisms, namely path at-
tention and sibling attention. Correspondingly, we
represent these two views of the DOM tree by two
types of node sets: path node sets and sibling node
sets. A path setN P⊂V is the ordered collection
of all nodes in an HTML path, from the root node
to an arbitrary node, as illustrated in Figure 3b.
A sibling setN S⊂V consists of the immediate
children of a non-leaf node. Thereupon, we de-
velop path and sibling attention mechanisms, as
described below, to explore the potential of model-
ing tree structures with Transformers.
Path Attention The path attention mechanism
captures the granularity of a node Vm within the
DOM tree, which carries useful information about
the node’s tendency to present a PT phrase. It
limits the attention target of a DOM node to its
ancestors or descendants only, echoing the edgesE
that deﬁne the DOM tree structure. Path node sets
help deﬁne an attention mask toward this purpose
by leaving out all “off-path” elements during the
self-attention message passing operation.
Suppose the input is H P∈ R|V|×dmodel, in each
attention head, the path attention scores aP
m ∈
(0, 1)1×|V| ofVm attending to all DOM nodes are
aP
m = SoftMax( H P
mW Q(H PW K)T
√dk
+ M P
m).
(3)
Here W∈ Rdmodel×dk are the FFN layers that map
the latent features to the reduced dk-dimensional
single-head attention space, as in (Vaswani et al.,
2017). M P∈{ 0,−∞}|V|×|V| is the path attention
mask as shown in Figure 3b.∀u,v∈ 1 :|V|,
M P
u,v =
{
0, ∃N P s.t.Vu∈N P,V v∈N P;
−∞, otherwise.
(4)
aP
m has non-zero values at positions corresponding
toVm’s ancestors or descendants. The single-head
attention output ofVm becomes
AttnP
m = aP
mH PW V. (5)
The rest of the architecture such as the layer norm
and the residual connection is the same as in the
Transformer and thus is omitted.
Sibling Attention Although sibling relations are
not described by the edgesE, encoding them can
provide a useful contextual signal based on the
observation that sibling PT phrases often form a
group. Accordingly, analogous to path attention,
we develop sibling attention by imposing an atten-
tion mask M S, which forces a node to focus only
on its siblings via self-attention. The sibling node
setN S helps deﬁne the mask. Its calculation is
identical to (3)–(5), except that the variables are
superscripted by sibling “·S” instead of path “·P”.
4.2.2 Node Positional Encodings
Different from graphs, a DOM tree is acyclic and
heterogeneous; the order of nodes inﬂuences their
relations and how the elements are rendered. As
Transformers do not encode such node order, po-
sitional embeddings are critical to capture such
positioning. (Yun et al., 2020). We consider three
types of absolute indices: global, level and sib-
ling positional indices, as shown in Figure 3a. The
global positional indexiG
m represents the position
of each node in the tree in the depth-ﬁrst order. It
helps TRENC understand how the nodes are or-
ganized in the rendered HTML pages. The level
indexiL
m and sibling indexiS
m on the other hand are
developed to assist the path and sibling attentions.
iL
m describes the level or depth of a node, to help
distinguish a parent from its children during the
7513

===PAGE BREAK===

path attention, while the iS
m captures the relative
order among siblings within the sibling attention.
We encode positional indices by ﬁrst applying
sinusoid functions (Vaswani et al., 2017) to convert
them to vectors iG
m, iL
m, iS
m∈ [0, 1]dmodel, followed
by applying an afﬁne transformation that maps each
of them into distinct latent spaces:
ˆiG
m = W GiG
m; ˆiL
m = W LiL
m; ˆiS
m = W SiS
m,
where W∈ Rdmodel×dmodel are FFN parameters.
4.2.3 T RENC Layers
In each layer, the path and sibling signals are mod-
eled by two parallel branches, which are identical
except for the positional embeddings and attention
mechanisms (Figure 2). Denoting the input feature
of layerl by H (l)∈ R|V|×dmodel, we have3
H P
m = H (l)
m + ˆiL
m; H S
m = H (l)
m + ˆiS
m, (6)
which are passed into the attention sublayers (3)–
(5) for message passing.4 The branch outputs ˆH P
and ˆH S are aggregated by a gating layer that gen-
erates the layer output ˆH (l):
ˆH (l)
m =g( ˆH P
m, ˆH S
m)⊙ ˆH P
m+
(1− g( ˆH P
m, ˆH S
m))⊙ ˆH S
m.
(7)
The input of the ﬁrst layer is the summation of the
node embedding and global positional embedding
H (1)
m = em + ˆiG
m, while the last output ˆH (N ) is
fed into a classiﬁcation layer to predict node labels,
assuming the model hasN layers in total.
4.3 Training and Inference
We use binary cross-entropy as our training objec-
tive. Suppose the predicted logit is ˆy, then the loss
at the level of a DOM tree is calculated as
ℓ =−
|V|∑
m=1
ym logσ(ˆym)+(1−ym) logσ(1−ˆym).
During inference, we use 0.5 as a hard classiﬁca-
tion threshold for the predicted probabilityσ(ˆy).
5 Evaluation
In this section, we ﬁrst describe a new dataset of in-
terests and their associated webpages, speciﬁcally
created to benchmark methods for the PT extraction
3Other positional encoding approaches such as (Chen et al.,
2021) show similar performances.
4We omit the layer indicator·(l) if possible for simplicity.
problem. We then evaluate TRENC on the same,
pitting it against a range of applicable baselines. Fi-
nally, we look at the effectiveness of various model
components via ablation studies.
5.1 Experiments
Dataset We constructed a dataset containing 95
shopping interests and queried Google for hub
pages using automatically selected prompts such
as “[hiking] equipment list”, where “hiking” is the
SI. For each SI, we downloaded the top 100 re-
turned pages and labeled them with PT nodes using
a semi-automatic process. First, we applied simple
heuristic rules to create noisy PT labels, based on
structure and tag matching. Thereafter, for each SI,
we presented roughly5 webpages having a noisy la-
bel to a human annotator to further reﬁne the labels.
Even so, the dataset is not entirely noise-free given
the subjective nature of the labeling process, with
many ambiguous cases, such as deciding whether a
software such as “VSCode” makes a valid product
type. The pages without any positive human label
were discarded. This process ultimately resulted
in a collection of 453 HTML webpages having
94,167 nodes, among which 12,548 nodes are pos-
itive. Further details are described in appendix A.
Setup We focus on a zero-shot setup w.r.t. SIs
since our goal is to evaluate various methods on
SIs not seen during training. Therefore, we split
the collection of webpages stratiﬁed by their asso-
ciated SIs (recall that a webpage is assumed to be
associated with only one SI) into training ( 75%),
validation (10%) and test partitions (15%), ensur-
ing that no SI is shared across partitions. As our
dataset is small, we randomly split the collection 5
times and generated 5 distinct datasets, each with
the three partitions. This approach is aimed to miti-
gate the impact of random factors while measuring
real model performance. We identify the datasets
as WEBPT-n, wheren∈ 1 : 5 is the split index.
Baselines We consider the following simple to
complex methods. 1) Heuristic rules are heuristic
functions we manually designed to locate PT nodes
from the DOM trees, which were also used to gener-
ate the initial, noisy node labels. 2) Text similarity
decides whether a node is positive based on the co-
sine similarity between text and SI embeddings. 3)
Fine-tuned BERT (BERT-FT) ﬁne-tunes a BERT-
base model to independently classify each tree node
based on its text. 4)Multilayer perceptron(MLP)
also classiﬁes each node independently, but with
7514

===PAGE BREAK===

Models WEBPT-1 WEBPT-2 WEBPT-3 WEBPT-4 WEBPT-5 ¯F1 ( precision / recall )
Heuristic
Methods
Similarity 40.12 39.14 35.84 36.55 33.80 37.09 ( 28.52 / 52.44 )
Rules 56.53 62.44 56.90 59.68 58.28 58.77 ( 44.20 / 88.02 )
Supervised
Methods
MLP 66.65 66.28 66.31 74.71 61.90 67.17 ( 72.11 / 63.38 )
BERT-FT 72.50 71.63 73.03 77.87 65.69 72.14 ( 68.32 / 76.65 )
Graphormer 71.09 81.76 75.73 66.81 69.67 73.01 ( 76.61 / 70.89 )
GAT 71.31 85.45 74.83 78.40 67.84 75.57 ( 77.07 / 74.28 )
GCN 76.13 84.07 79.16 81.50 71.92 78.56 ( 84.44 / 73.57 )
TRENC 79.65 88.26 78.99 82.40 75.35 80.93 ( 84.06 / 77.81 )
Table 1: Test F1 scores on each dataset WEBPT-n and the macro-averaged results (in %).
2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0
Average depth
0.0
0.5
1.0
F1 scores
TrENC GCN
(a) F1 vs. DOM tree depth
1 2 3 4 5
Average depth level
0.6
0.8
F1 scores
TrENC GCN (b) Average F1 vs. depth level
Figure 4: Test F1 scores against the DOM tree depths.
ﬁxed BERT text embeddings followed by a set of
FFN layers. 5) Graph neural networks (GNNs)
propagate node semantics throughout the graph by
aggregating neighboring node embeddings. GNN
family has many variances, and we focus on GCN
and GAT. 6) Graphormer (Ying et al., 2021), de-
signed for molecular graphs, adds special encod-
ings and attention masks to the Transformer model.
Please see appendix B.2 for implementation details.
Metrics We evaluate each model with the F 1
scores corresponding to each split WEBPT-i and
the macro-averaged F 1 score ¯F1 = 1
5
∑5
n=1 F1n
with the corresponding macro precision and recall.
All trainable methods are equipped with early
stopping techniques based on validation F1 scores.
To further reduce the inﬂuence of random factors
without increasing training pressure, we store 5
snapshots of the models that perform the best on
the validation dataset during training. During the
test, we predict 5 sets of labels from the model
snapshots and use the majority-voted labels as the
ﬁnal model predictions. It can be regarded as a
simpliﬁed model ensemble method often used to
improve model robustness (Dong et al., 2020).
5.2 Main Results
Table 1 shows the results of our comparative evalu-
ation. As seen, TRENC outperforms all methods,
exceeding the strongest baseline, GCN, by a mar-
gin of 2.37 absolute F1 on average. Considering
the small size of our datasets, it is not surprising
that the test F 1 scores have relatively large vari-
ation across different data splits, as the correla-
tion of data distributions of the training and test
sets is susceptible to random factors. Nonetheless,
TRENC achieves the best performance on 4 out
of 5 splits as well as exceeds by a good margin on
average, which strengthens the conﬁdence of eval-
uation. Surprisingly, Graphormer underperforms
GNN models and barely outperforms BERT-FT, a
model that treats nodes independently without con-
sidering the tree structures. It indicates that models
designed for other graphs such as molecular graphs
are not directly applicable to our case. Instead
of helping, the features Graphormer emphasizes
prevent the model from learning a reasonable repre-
sentation of the DOM tree. Table 1 also shows that
the cosine similarity between SI and PT embed-
dings does not present a good performance. This
is not unexpected as SI and PTs are not usually
semantically similar, making it a sub-optimal way
to directly compare their embeddings.
We also compare TRENC with GCN at varying
levels of DOM tree complexity. Figure 4a shows
tree-level F1 scores of each DOM tree against its
depth, which is the average depth of its nodes
1
|V|
∑|V|
m=1iL
m and roughly echos the tree complex-
ity. Figure 4b divides the depth equally into5 levels
and presents the average F1 for each level. As seen,
TRENC has better overall performance than GCN
at all depths. In addition, the gap between TRENC
and GCN increases when the tree is deeper, which
indicates that TRENC can better encode complex
trees due to the global message-passing ability of
the self-attention mechanism.
5.3 Ablation Studies
We ablate input features and model components
from TRENC to understand their effectiveness. Ta-
7515

===PAGE BREAK===

Models Average F1 Gap
TRENC 80.93 -
Input
features
w/o SI 79.83 1.10↓
w/o tag 78.82 2.11↓
w/o text 57.98 22.95↓
Model
components
w/o gating 80.39 0.54↓
Transformer 78.44 2.49↓
w/o pos emb 79.60 1.33↓
w/o pth attn 78.98 1.95↓
w/o sbl attn 78.04 2.89↓
Sequence
encoding
BERT-large 79.36 1.57↓
RoBERTa 78.54 2.39↓
Sentence-BERT 74.73 6.20↓
Table 2: Ablation study F1 scores (in %). “Pth” is short
for path; “sbl” is short for sibling; and “pos emb” rep-
resents positional embeddings.
ble 2 shows the ablation results.
Input Features As seen, although removing any
input feature (§ 4.1) impairs the model perfor-
mance, text sequence is the most critical feature
for TRENC. We further notice that without text se-
quence, TRENC performs quite close to the heuris-
tic rules that utilize very limited lexical features
(Table 1). This may indicate that TRENC exhausts
the structural information available in a DOM tree.
Although not as signiﬁcant as text sequences,
incorporating SIs and tags does enhance the model
performance. Injecting SIs turns the model’s at-
tention to their correlation with PTs. But such
improvement is limited as the correlation is not
strong, as discussed in § 5.2.
Model Components We investigate the function-
alities of model components by removing them sep-
arately. The Transformer model discards edgesE
and treats the tree as a linearized sequence of nodes
arranged by their global positional indicesiG. Al-
though it learns certain structural dependencies, as
indicated by its advance in comparison with MLP
(Table 1), missing explicit edge knowledge still
affects the model’s judgment.
The results also show that path attention, sibling
attention and positional encodings all contribute to
better tree encoding. The row “w/o pos enc” re-
moves the level and sibling encodings iL, iS but
keeps the global encoding iG. Without iL and
iS, the model cannot properly identify the hierar-
chy and sibling order between nodes and therefore
performs worse. Compared to path attention, sib-
ling attention demonstrates a higher importance in
context understanding, even though removing path
SI Node text sequence
FP
at-home-spa Esthetics or Skin Care
hiking Merrell Overlook Tall 2 WP Boot
running Credit card
FN ﬁshing Rods for River Fishing
canoeing Water bottle - 1 litre is good
Table 3: Examples of common mistakes made by
TRENC. FP/FN indicates false positives/negatives.
attention means a node no longer has access to any
other nodes from the tree.
Sequence Encoding In our implementation, we
use the uncased BERT-base model withdBERT =
768 as our encoders for sequence embeddings e
and concept embeddings c.5 The embeddings are
ﬁxed during the training process.
We also test other pre-trained language mod-
els, including BERT-large, RoBERTa (Liu et al.,
2019) and Sentence-BERT (Reimers and Gurevych,
2019), which is designed for comparing the se-
quence similarities and claims better sentence em-
bedding performance than BERT. However, Table 2
shows that none outperforms BERT-base (Devlin
et al., 2019). The reason might be the incompati-
bility of their training corpus and objective to our
task. The results indicate that choosing an encoding
model is vital to have good performance.
5.4 Case Studies on Classiﬁcation Mistakes
Table 3 shows a few false positive (FP) and false
negative (FN) examples to illustrate certain text se-
quence patterns where TRENC fails. As seen from
FP cases, TRENC either struggles to determine
whether it is a broad PT category ( 1st row), has
challenges discerning a PT from a speciﬁc product
(2nd row), or makes mistakes when unavoidable
non-purchasable items are mentioned on the page
along with other valid PTs ( 3rd row). From the
FN cases, we conjecture that long descriptions may
overwhelm the textual semantics and deviate its
embedding, thereby preventing TRENC predict
correctly (4th & 5th rows). The reason might be
that TRENC have a stronger dependency on the
node semantics than the structure, which is also in-
dicated by the ablation results, and properly balanc-
ing the conditional terms may mitigate this issue.
5https://huggingface.co/bert-base-uncased
7516

===PAGE BREAK===

6 Conclusion
In this paper, we consider a new problem of ex-
tracting product types from the Web pages that
are relevant to broad shopping interests such as
camping. We model the problem as a node classi-
ﬁcation task and propose TRENC , a Transformer
encoder-based model that leverages unique char-
acteristics of DOM trees to perform product type
extraction. In addition to the node-level signals
including HTML tags, text sequences and shop-
ping interest semantics, TRENC design path and
sibling attention mechanisms based on DOM tree’s
ancestor-descendant and sibling relations. Together
with the tree-based positional embeddings, the
structural attention mechanisms promote the tree
architecture understanding and make the classiﬁ-
cation more effective. Zero-shot experiments on a
new dataset TRENC containing 95 shopping inter-
ests and 453 pages show that TRENC outperforms
the baseline graph encoding models. This work
pushes the frountier of researches of a more or-
ganized and intuitive result recommendation for
middle-funnel customers.
Limitations
Apart from the issues mentioned in § 5.4, another
limitation of TRENC is that it does not integrate
any pre-training process such as BERT, which is
effective in increasing the language understanding
ability and adopted by previous works focusing on
token-level classiﬁcation tasks (Wang et al., 2022;
Deng et al., 2022). Two factors lead to this deci-
sion. First, we use DOM nodes instead of tokens
as the classiﬁcation object and focus on relations
between nodes rather than tokens. As the node text
sequence is a composition of an arbitrary number
of tokens, adopting the conventional masked lan-
guage modeling (MLM) training objective (Devlin
et al., 2019) seems impractical since there is no
direct mapping from an embedding vector, one-hot
encoded or not, to a sentence. The second reason
is simply that we do not possess the corpus or com-
putation resources for model pre-training. In fact,
we expect a properly designed pre-training scheme
to bring better node semantics representation and
SI-PT relation modeling. It is an interesting topic
and deserves further study.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by Amazon.com
Services LLC, NSF IIS-2008334, IIS-2106961, and
CAREER IIS-2144338.
We would like to thank Xian Li, Binxuan Huang,
Chenwei Zhang, Yan Liang, and Jingbo Shang for
their insightful advice on this work.
References
Michele Banko, Michael J. Cafarella, Stephen Soder-
land, Matt Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. 2007.
Open information extraction from the web. In Pro-
ceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcal Intelligence , IJCAI’07, pages 2670–
2676, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc.
Shaked Brody, Uri Alon, and Eran Yahav. 2022. How
attentive are graph attention networks? In The Tenth
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022 .
OpenReview.net.
Chia-Hui Chang, M. Kayed, M.R. Girgis, and K.F.
Shaalan. 2006. A survey of web information extrac-
tion systems. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering, 18(10):1411–1428.
Pu-Chin Chen, Henry Tsai, Srinadh Bhojanapalli,
Hyung Won Chung, Yin-Wen Chang, and Chun-
Sung Ferng. 2021. A simple and effective positional
encoding for transformers. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 2974–2988, Online and
Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Xiang Deng, Prashant Shiralkar, Colin Lockard, Binx-
uan Huang, and Huan Sun. 2022. DOM-LM: learn-
ing generalizable representations for HTML docu-
ments. CoRR, abs/2201.10608.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN,
USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Pa-
pers), pages 4171–4186. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Xibin Dong, Zhiwen Yu, Wenming Cao, Yifan Shi, and
Qianli Ma. 2020. A survey on ensemble learning.
Frontiers Comput. Sci., 14(2):241–258.
Vijay Prakash Dwivedi and Xavier Bresson. 2020. A
generalization of transformer networks to graphs.
CoRR, abs/2012.09699.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. 2019. Fast graph
representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In
ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on
Graphs and Manifolds.
7517

===PAGE BREAK===

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation ,
9(8):1735–1780.
Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao
Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta,
and Jure Leskovec. 2020. Open graph benchmark:
Datasets for machine learning on graphs. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems
33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-
12, 2020, virtual.
Zhiheng Huang, Wei Xu, and Kai Yu. 2015. Bidi-
rectional LSTM-CRF models for sequence tagging.
CoRR, abs/1508.01991.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. 2017. Semi-
supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional
networks. In 5th International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France,
April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings .
OpenReview.net.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining ap-
proach. CoRR, abs/1907.11692.
Colin Lockard, Prashant Shiralkar, Xin Luna Dong,
and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2020. ZeroShotCeres:
Zero-shot relation extraction from semi-structured
webpages. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 8105–8117, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2019. Decou-
pled weight decay regularization. In 7th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019 .
OpenReview.net.
Lukasz Maziarka, Tomasz Danel, Slawomir Mucha,
Krzysztof Rataj, Jacek Tabor, and Stanislaw Jas-
trzebski. 2020. Molecule attention transformer.
CoRR, abs/2002.08264.
Jinyoung Park, Seongjun Yun, Hyeon-Jin Park, Jae-
woo Kang, Jisu Jeong, Kyung-Min Kim, Jung-Woo
Ha, and Hyunwoo J. Kim. 2022. Deformable graph
transformer. CoRR, abs/2206.14337.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam
Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca
Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Z.
Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Te-
jani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang,
Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. 2019. Py-
torch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019,
NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver,
BC, Canada, pages 8024–8035.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-
bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing, EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019,
Hong Kong, China, November 3-7, 2019 , pages
3980–3990. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Hassan A. Sleiman and Rafael Corchuelo. 2013. A sur-
vey on region extractors from web documents.IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering ,
25(9):1960–1981.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-
9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 5998–6008.
Petar Veliˇckovi´c, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova,
Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua Bengio.
2018. Graph attention networks. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Qifan Wang, Yi Fang, Anirudh Ravula, Fuli Feng, Xi-
aojun Quan, and Dongfang Liu. 2022. Webformer:
The web-page transformer for structure information
extraction. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Con-
ference 2022, WWW ’22, pages 3124–3133, New
York, NY , USA. Association for Computing Machin-
ery.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. 2020.
Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language pro-
cessing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Qitian Wu, Wentao Zhao, Zenan Li, David Wipf, and
Junchi Yan. 2022. Nodeformer: A scalable graph
structure learning transformer for node classiﬁcation.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems.
Yongqin Xian, Christoph H. Lampert, Bernt Schiele,
and Zeynep Akata. 2019. Zero-shot learning — A
comprehensive evaluation of the good, the bad and
the ugly. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. ,
41(9):2251–2265.
7518

===PAGE BREAK===

Huimin Xu, Wenting Wang, Xin Mao, Xinyu Jiang, and
Man Lan. 2019. Scaling up open tagging from tens
to thousands: Comprehension empowered attribute
value extraction from product title. In Proceedings
of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , pages 5214–5223, Flo-
rence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Chengxuan Ying, Tianle Cai, Shengjie Luo, Shuxin
Zheng, Guolin Ke, Di He, Yanming Shen, and Tie-
Yan Liu. 2021. Do transformers really perform
badly for graph representation? In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems
2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual ,
pages 28877–28888.
Chulhee Yun, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh
Rawat, Sashank J. Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar.
2020. Are transformers universal approximators
of sequence-to-sequence functions? In 8th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30,
2020. OpenReview.net.
Guineng Zheng, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Xin Luna
Dong, and Feifei Li. 2018. Opentag: Open attribute
value extraction from product proﬁles. In Proceed-
ings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Confer-
ence on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD
’18, pages 1049–1058, New York, NY , USA. Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery.
Yichao Zhou, Ying Sheng, Nguyen V o, Nick Edmonds,
and Sandeep Tata. 2021. Simpliﬁed dom trees for
transferable attribute extraction from the web.
7519

===PAGE BREAK===

<root> ""
<p2> "Hiking equipment list"
<ul> ""
<li> "long-sleeve shirt"
<li> "Trekking poles"
<p2> "Contact"
<root> ""
<ul> ""
<li> "long-sleeve shirt"
<li> "Trekking poles"
<p2> "Contact"
<p2> "Hiking equipment list"
<footer> "Follow"
<div> "Facebook"
<div> "Twitter"
<div> ""
<div> ""
Original DOM Tree Processed DOM Tree
Figure 5: An example of HTML processing.
A Dataset Details
A.1 Dataset Construction
We build WEBPT to realize a quantitative analy-
sis of different PT extraction methods. WEBPT
is a collection of hub pages relevant to a set of
pre-deﬁned SIs. Its construction process mainly
consists of 5 steps: 1) deﬁning SIs; 2) crawling
hub pages; 3) processing HTML documents; 4)
labeling documents; and 5) splitting data points.
Deﬁning Shopping Interests As the ﬁrst step,
we establish a set of SIs through brainstorming.
Particularly, we focus on popular activities, sports,
hobbies and special events. Please check Table 6
and 7 for a complete list of SIs.
Crawling Hub Pages The hub pages are the
webpages, each providing PTs related to a speciﬁc
SI. Due to the variety of SIs, it is infeasible to focus
on one or several websites for hub page collection.
For example, a website specializing in sports will
not provide information on “sewing” with a high
chance and vice versa. In addition, gathering infor-
mation from different websites may eliminate the
bias probably existing in one website, according to
the law of large numbers.
Considering this situation, we take advantage
of Google Search with a simple query selector to
locate the hub pages. Each SIC is combined with
sufﬁces “equipment list”, “supply list”, “tool list”
and “checklist” before being fed into the search
engine for querying. The system selects the com-
bination with the largest number of results, whose
top-100 query results are saved for later usage. We
keep only the HTML pages and discard other docu-
ments such as PDFs or CSVs, so the actual number
of saved documents may vary.
Processing HTML Documents This step aims
to simplify the DOM tree structure to facilitate PT
extraction. The RAW DOM tree is complicated
<root> ""
<ul> ""
<li> "long-sleeve shirt"
<li> "Trekking poles"
<p2> "Contact"
<p2> "Hiking equipment list"
<div> ""
Original DOM Tree
<ul> ""
<li> "Sunscreen"
<li> "First-aid kit"
<li> "Sunglasses"
<root> ""
<ul> ""
<li> "long-sleeve shirt"
<li> "Trekking poles"
<p2> "Hiking equipment list"
<div> ""
<root> ""
<p2> "Contact"
<div> ""
<ul> ""
<li> "Sunscreen"
<li> "First-aid kit"
<li> "Sunglasses"
Separated DOM Trees
Figure 6: An example of separating a DOM tree.
with decorative and supporting scripts irrelevant
to the content, which easily submerges the useful
information we want to extract and decreases the
false positive rate. We prune the trees by remov-
ing all headers, footers, and leaf nodes with empty
text sequences. Then, we replace the nodes with
only one child by their children to decrease the tree
depth. To reduce the tree depth, we delete the nodes
with only one child and then connect their children
with subsequent subtrees directly with their par-
ents. The process is illustrated in Figure 5. Exper-
iments show that this HTML processing strategy
successively simpliﬁes the DOM structure without
sacriﬁcing any targeted content.
Labeling Documents and Splitting Data Points
These two steps are sufﬁciently discussed in § 5.1
as will not be repeated. The only supplement is
that the heuristic method used for initializing the
noisy labels and compared in Table 1 is empirically
developed. We omit its discussion since it is com-
plex and not the focus of this paper. The detailed
dataset splits are presented in Table 6 and 7.
Data Processing for Transformers One limita-
tion of the Transformer models such as BERT and
TRENC is that they need to set a constraint to the
length of the input sequence|V| since the complex-
ity of the self-attention mechanism isO(|V| 2) and
easily explodes when|V| is too large. Considering
this drawback, for the node Transformers including
Graphormer and TRENC , we set 512 as the maxi-
mum size of a DOM tree and split those that exceed
this size. In addition, we guarantee that each split
tree has 64 nodes at minimum. Figure 6 shows an
example of the separation process.
A.2 Dataset Statistics
We present the dataset statistics in Table 4. DOM
trees are larger than molecular graphs but signiﬁ-
cantly smaller than knowledge graphs.
7520

===PAGE BREAK===

Attribute Value
# Shopping Interests 95
# DOM Trees 453
# Total Nodes 94,167
# Leaf Nodes 70,161
# Positive PT Nodes 12,548
Average # Nodes per Tree 207.87
Maximum # Nodes in a Tree 2,748
Minimum # Nodes in a Tree 19
Median # Nodes in a Tree 156
Average Tree Depth 7.06
Maximum Tree Depth 18
Minimum Tree Depth 3
Median Tree Depth 7
Average # Trees per SI 4.77
Average # Nodes per SI 991.23
Maximum # Nodes for an SI 3,050
Minimum # Nodes for an SI 363
Median # Nodes for an SI 935
Table 4: Dataset statistics.
A.3 Labeling Quality
The dataset is labeled by one individual as the task
is straightforward. To investigate the labeling qual-
ity, we randomly select 25 DOM trees, removing
their original labels and presenting them to 2 indi-
viduals for re-labeling. Table 5 presents the statis-
tics and results. It shows that our labeling quality
is decent despite some inevitable disagreements on
ambiguous cases, as exampled in Figure 7.
Attribute Value
# DOM Trees 25
# Total Nodes 5,938
# Positive PT Nodes 683
# Disagreement 87
# Fleiss’κ 98.53
Table 5: Annotation quality investigation.
<root> ""
<strong> "Men's shirt"
<p2> "Shirt"
<div> ""
Ambiguous Case 1
<strong> "Women's shirt"
<span> "..."
<span> "..."
<root> ""
<p> "..."
<p2> "Shirt"
<div> ""
Ambiguous Case 2
<strong> "shirt"
<p> "..."
<p> "..."
Figure 7: Examples of typical ambiguous annotation
cases. In case 1, annotators may regard “men’s shirt”
and “woman’s shirt” as negative as they are subcate-
gories of the PT “shirt”; in case 2, the latter “shirt” may
be regarded as negative as it is a repetition surrounded
by long descriptive sentences.
A.4 Data Usage
All Web pages used by WEBPT are included in
the Common Crawl repository.6 They are intended
to provide information on a topic or interest, so
consistent with that idea, we labeled the product
types on each page. The labels do not contain any
personally identiﬁable information. We are making
the annotated dataset available to encourage further
research on the product type extraction problem.
The WEBPT dataset is licensed under the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Li-
cense. To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
B Implementation Details
B.1 T RENC Hyper-Parameters
We set the model dimensionality dmodel = 128
and the number of TRENC layersN = 12. Each
attention branch has 4 attention heads, and the
single-head attention dimensionalitydk = 32. The
feed-forward layer above the attention layer (Fig-
ure 2) ﬁrst maps the features fromdmodel to a 512-
dimensional latent space and then maps it back.
The classiﬁcation layer consists of 2 FFN sublay-
ers that ﬁrst downscale the TRENC layer output
to 16-dimensional and then to the 1-dimensional
output logits ˆy. We use the same activation func-
tions and dropout strategy as described in (Vaswani
et al., 2017). Our experiments show that the per-
formance remains similar when we use 6 or 8 as
the number of heads or use model dimensionality
dmodel = 512.
We train the model using10−4 as the peak learn-
ing rate of the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov and
Hutter, 2019) with linear scheduler with 0.1 warm-
up ratio. The batch size is 8 and the random seed is
42. We do not take multiple runs for each model on
each dataset as our dataset and evaluation strategies
(§ 5.1) can minimize the impact of random factors.
Using another random seed ( 0) only changes the
¯F1 scores of TRENC and GCN by 0.03 and 0.05,
respectively. The model is implemented with the
“Transformers” library (Wolf et al., 2020) in Py-
Torch (Paszke et al., 2019). The hyper-parameters
not mentioned above keep their default values.
B.2 Baseline Methods
Text Similarity We adopt the same approach as
described in § 4.1 with the uncased BERT-base
6https://commoncrawl.org/
7521

===PAGE BREAK===

model to generate the text sequence embedding em
of each node Vm and the concept embeddings c.
Then, we compute their cosine similarity through
simm∈ (0, 1) = eT
mc
∥em∥∥c∥.
We decide the classiﬁcation threshold by exhaust-
ing possible values with 0.01 interval within (0, 1)
and select the one that gives the largest F 1 score.
Notice that this threshold searching method is only
applied to the text similarity baseline. Others take
a constant threshold 0.5, as described in § 4.3.
BERT-FT BERT-FT classiﬁes each nodeVm in-
dependently by ﬁne-tuning the uncased BERT-base
model with the sequence classiﬁcation task. The
model input is the combination of the sequence
Sm and the concept C, i.e., “[CLS]Sm [SEP]
C [SEP]”. It does not consider the tag tm. We
append a one-layer FFN to the embedding corre-
sponding to the [CLS] token to map it to a 1-
dimensional logit. The training objective is mini-
mizing the binary cross-entropy.
MLP MLP can be considered as a TRENC
model without TRENC layers. In other words,
it directly feeds the node embeddings e (§ 4.1) into
the classiﬁcation layer (Figure 2) without consid-
ering any inter-dependencies between nodes. We
increase its classiﬁcation layer depth until the vali-
dation F1 stops improving for a fair comparison.
GNNs Similar to MLP, GNN models substitute
the TRENC layers in the TRENC model with the
GCN and GAT layers, respectively. The GNN lay-
ers are implemented with the “PyTorch Geometric”
library (Fey and Lenssen, 2019). The number of
GNN layers is ﬁne-tuned according to the valida-
tion performance.
Graphormer We take the original implementa-
tion of Ying et al. (2021) and keep all model com-
ponents.7 The differences are that we initialize the
node features with node embeddings e instead of
atom categories, and we train the model with node
classiﬁcation instead of graph classiﬁcation. We
keep its scheme for encoding edges but introduce
only one edge category representing the ancestor-
descendant relationship.
7https://github.com/microsoft/Graphormer.
SI WEBPT-n
1 2 3 4 5
3d-printing tr tr tr tr tr
airsoft-paintball tr tt tr tt tr
archery tr tr tt vl tr
astronomy tr tr tr tr tr
at-home-ﬁtness tr vl tr tt tt
at-home-spa tt tr tr vl tr
badminton tr vl tr tr vl
baking tr tr vl tr tr
bartending vl tr tr tr tr
baseball tr tr tr tr tr
basketball tr tr vl tr tt
billiards-pool tt vl vl tt tr
bird-watching tr tt tr tt tr
boating tr tr tt tr tr
bowling tr tt tt tr vl
boxing tr tr tr tr tr
calligraphy tr tr vl tr vl
camping tr tr tr tr tr
candle-making tr tr tr tt vl
canoeing tr tt tr tr tr
cheerleading tr tr tr tr tr
cleaning tr tr tr tr tr
climbing tt tr tr tr vl
coffee tr tr tr tr tr
comics-manga tr tr tr tr tr
content-creation tt vl tt tr vl
cricket tr tr vl tt tr
crossﬁt vl tr tr tr tr
cycling tr tr tt tr tr
digital-art tr tr tr vl tr
diy-home-improvement tr tr tr tr tr
dj tr tr tr tr tr
drag-queen tr tr tr tr tt
drawing-and-sketching tr tr tt tr tr
fencing tr tr tt tr tr
ﬁeld-hockey tr vl vl tr tr
ﬁshing tt vl tr tr tr
ﬂoral-arranging tr tr tr tr tr
football vl tr tr tr tr
gaming tt tr tr tr tr
gardening tr tt vl vl vl
golﬁng tr tr tr tr tr
gymnastics vl tr tr tr tr
hair-care tr tr vl vl tt
hiking tt tr tr tr tr
hockey tr vl tr tr tr
home-entertainment tt vl tr tr tt
home-schooling tr tr tr tr tr
horse-riding tr tr tr tr tt
Table 6: Shopping interests and their splits in each
dataset. “Tr”, “vl” and “tt” represent “training”, “val-
idation” and “test” respectively.
7522

===PAGE BREAK===

indoor-plants tr tr tt vl tr
interior-design tr tr tr vl tr
kayaking tr tr tr tr vl
knitting tr tt tr tr tr
lacrosse tr tt tt tr tr
leathercraft vl tt tr tr tr
makeup tr tr tr tr tt
model-trains tr tt tr tr tr
music-production vl tr tr tr tr
nails tr tr tt tr tr
painting tr tr tr tr tt
paper-crafting tr tr tr tr tr
parenting tr tr tr tr tr
party-planning tr tr tr tr tt
pet tt tr tr tt tr
pilates tr tr tr tr tr
pottery tt tr tr tr tr
rugby tr tr tr tt tr
running tr tt tr tr tr
sailing tr tr tr tr tr
scrapbooking tr tr tr tr tr
scuba-diving tr tr tt tr tt
sewing tr tr tr tr tr
skating tr tr tr tr tr
skiiing tt tr tr tr tr
skin-care vl tr vl tr tr
smart-home tr tr tr tr tr
snowboarding vl tr tr tr tr
soap-making vl tr tr tr tt
soccer tr tr tr tt vl
softball tr tr tr tr tr
storage-and-organization tr tt tr tr tt
student-dorm tr tt tr tr tr
surﬁng tr tr tr vl tr
swimming tr tr tr tt tr
table-tennis tr tr tt tr tt
teaching tt vl tr tt tr
tennis tt tr tr tr tr
travel tr tr tt tr tr
volleyball tr tr tr tr tr
weaving-and-spinning tt vl vl vl tr
wedding tr tt tr tt tr
wine tr tr tr vl vl
work-from-home vl tt tr tt tt
wrestling tr tr tr tr tr
yoga tr tr tt tt tr
Table 7: SIs and splits (cont.).
7523

===PAGE BREAK===

ACL 2023 Responsible NLP Checklist
A For every submission:
□ A1. Did you describe the limitations of your work?
Section 6
□ A2. Did you discuss any potential risks of your work?
Our work is totally built upon publicly accessible materials. To the best of our knowledge, It will not
trigger any ethical or safety concerns.
□ A3. Do the abstract and introduction summarize the paper’s main claims?
Section "Abstract" and section 1
□ A4. Have you used AI writing assistants when working on this paper?
Left blank.
B □ Did you use or create scientiﬁc artifacts?
This topic is mainly discussed in appendix A and appendix B.
□ B1. Did you cite the creators of artifacts you used?
Appendix B
□ B2. Did you discuss the license or terms for use and / or distribution of any artifacts?
Appendix A.4
□ B3. Did you discuss if your use of existing artifact(s) was consistent with their intended use, provided
that it was speciﬁed? For the artifacts you create, do you specify intended use and whether that is
compatible with the original access conditions (in particular, derivatives of data accessed for research
purposes should not be used outside of research contexts)?
Appendix A.4
□ B4. Did you discuss the steps taken to check whether the data that was collected / used contains any
information that names or uniquely identiﬁes individual people or offensive content, and the steps
taken to protect / anonymize it?
Appendix A.4
□ B5. Did you provide documentation of the artifacts, e.g., coverage of domains, languages, and
linguistic phenomena, demographic groups represented, etc.?
Appendix A
□ B6. Did you report relevant statistics like the number of examples, details of train / test / dev splits,
etc. for the data that you used / created? Even for commonly-used benchmark datasets, include the
number of examples in train / validation / test splits, as these provide necessary context for a reader
to understand experimental results. For example, small differences in accuracy on large test sets may
be signiﬁcant, while on small test sets they may not be.
Appendix A
C □ Did you run computational experiments?
Section 5
□ C1. Did you report the number of parameters in the models used, the total computational budget
(e.g., GPU hours), and computing infrastructure used?
Appendix B
The Responsible NLP Checklist used at ACL 2023 is adopted from NAACL 2022, with the addition of a question on AI writing
assistance.
7524

===PAGE BREAK===

□ C2. Did you discuss the experimental setup, including hyperparameter search and best-found
hyperparameter values?
Section 5.1
□ C3. Did you report descriptive statistics about your results (e.g., error bars around results, summary
statistics from sets of experiments), and is it transparent whether you are reporting the max, mean,
etc. or just a single run?
Section 5.2
□ C4. If you used existing packages (e.g., for preprocessing, for normalization, or for evaluation), did
you report the implementation, model, and parameter settings used (e.g., NLTK, Spacy, ROUGE,
etc.)?
Not applicable. Left blank.
D □ Did you use human annotators (e.g., crowdworkers) or research with human participants?
Section 5 and Appendix A
□ D1. Did you report the full text of instructions given to participants, including e.g., screenshots,
disclaimers of any risks to participants or annotators, etc.?
The annotation guideline is straightforward and made orally.
□ D2. Did you report information about how you recruited (e.g., crowdsourcing platform, students)
and paid participants, and discuss if such payment is adequate given the participants’ demographic
(e.g., country of residence)?
No additional compensation was provided.
□ D3. Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data you’re
using/curating? For example, if you collected data via crowdsourcing, did your instructions to
crowdworkers explain how the data would be used?
Not applicable. Left blank.
□ D4. Was the data collection protocol approved (or determined exempt) by an ethics review board?
Not applicable. Left blank.
□ D5. Did you report the basic demographic and geographic characteristics of the annotator population
that is the source of the data?
Not applicable. Left blank.
7525