Working Paper 23-062 
Using LLMs for Market 
Research 
James Brand 
Ayelet Israeli 
Donald Ngwe 

===PAGE BREAK===

Working Paper 23-062 
Copyright © 2023, 2024, 2025, and 2026 by James Brand, Ayelet Israeli, and Donald Ngwe. 
Working papers are in draft form. This working paper is distributed for purposes of comment and discussion only.  It 
may not be reproduced without permission of the cop yright holder. Copies of working papers are available from the 
author. 
The authors are grateful to Noah Ahmadi and Meng Yang for excellent research assistance. This manuscript was 
previously circulated with the title "Using GPT for Market Research."
Funding for this research was provided in part by Harvard Business School. 
Using LLMs for Market 
Research 
James Brand 
Microsoft 
Ayelet Israeli 
Harvard Business School 
Donald Ngwe 
Microsoft 

===PAGE BREAK===

Using LLMs for Market Research *
James Brand† Ayelet Israeli‡ Donald Ngwe†
April 30, 2026
*The authors are grateful to Noah Ahmadi and Meng Yang for excellent research assistance. The authors
are thankful for valuable feedback from seminar participants at Harvard Business School, the European Virtual
Quant Marketing Seminar, Emory University , Dartmouth University , the Future of AI and Economics conference
at Harvard Business School, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, the Quantitative Marketing and Economics Confer-
ence, the Business and Generative AI Workshop at Wharton, the Digital Marketing Symposium at Boston Univer-
sity , University of Southern California, Singapore Management University , Nanyang Technological University , the
Sawtooth Analytics Insight Summit, Simon Fraser University , Drexel University , The 25th ACM conference for
Economics and Computation, the Joint Statistics Meetings, MIT , and MSI/ARF Analytics and Forecasting Confer-
ence. This manuscript was previously circulated with the title “Using GPT for Market Research.”
†Office of the Chief Economist, Microsoft; jamesbrand@microsoft.com and donald.ngwe@microsoft.com
‡Harvard Business School; aisraeli@hbs.edu

===PAGE BREAK===

Using LLMs for Market Research
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have rapidly gained popularity as labor-augmenting
tools for programming, writing, and many other processes that benefit from quick text
generation. In this paper we explore the uses and limitations of LLMs for researchers and
practitioners who aim to understand consumer preferences. We focus on the distributional
nature of LLM responses, and query the different LLMs to generate dozens of responses to
each survey question. We offer two sets of results to illustrate and assess our approach.
First, we show that estimates of willingness-to-pay for products and features derived from
LLM responses are sometimes comparable to estimates from human studies, but are often
inaccurate and in some cases wrong-signed. Second, we demonstrate a practical method
for market researchers to enhance LLMs’ responses by incorporating previous survey data
from similar contexts via fine-tuning. This method improves alignment with human re-
sponses for existing and, importantly , new product features within the same product cat-
egory and population. We do not find similar improvements in the alignment for new
product categories or for differences between customer segments. Taken together, our re-
sults suggest that the appropriate use case for LLMs in market research is as a supplement
to—not a substitute for—human studies, with fine-tuning providing the most reliable gains
when prior human survey data from the relevant category and population are already in
hand.
Keywords: Large language models (LLMs), Generative Artificial Intelligence (Gen AI), Gener-
ative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT), Market research, Consumer preferences, Artificial Intel-
ligence, Conjoint Analysis.

===PAGE BREAK===

1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are a type of artificial intelligence designed to understand and
generate human-like language. These models are trained on vast amounts of text data, which
allows them to learn the patterns and structures of natural language. Large language models
have a wide range of applications, from language translation and speech recognition to content
generation and text classification. They are becoming increasingly popular in industries such
as finance, healthcare, and marketing, as they are able to process and analyze large amounts
of text data quickly . LLMs power several well-known AI-augmented solutions for coding (e.g.,
Github Copilot) and search (e.g., Bing, Gemini), and a small number of studies have shown
that they can also replicate limited real-world behavior, including voting (Argyle et al., 2023),
rational behavior (Horton (2023) and Chen et al. (2023)), persuasiveness (Hackenburg and
Margetts (2024) and Costello et al. (2024)), and even conducting scientific research (Lehr et
al., 2024).
In this paper, we investigate how LLMs (in our case, primarily OpenAI’s Generative Pre-trained
Transformer model, “GPT” henceforth) can be used as a tool for market research. 1 GPT’s
training data includes information from numerous sources on the internet, which may include
product reviews and other online forums with contributions from a wide range of consumers
discussing the products they shop for and purchase. Because GPT and similar LLMs are trained
to respond to queries and prompts with the most likely next sequence of text, we hypothesize
that the responses GPT provides to market research surveys will, in part, reflect the types of
responses that the customers in the training data would have given to the same questions.
Together, these components suggest that GPT may contain useful information about consumer
preferences. However, as we show, whether that information translates into accurate prefer-
ence estimates is far from guaranteed, and the approach comes with important limitations that
1Note that we access GPT directly using OpenAI’s API rather than through the more widely-used ChatGPT
interface. ChatGPT is an application that uses a variant of GPT which has been optimized for dialogue and
following user instructions rather than the type of text completion we focus on here. See Appendix A for code
and details of our implementation.
1

===PAGE BREAK===

must be understood before it can be used responsibly .
Specifically , this paper addresses three questions: (1) Can LLMs generate realistic estimates
of consumer preferences out of the box? (2) Can LLMs recover meaningful preference hetero-
geneity across demographic groups? and (3) Can prior human survey data be used to fine-tune
an LLM and improve the alignment of its responses with new human surveys, including for new
product features? We investigate each of these questions through a set of custom human and
LLM studies designed to mimic the information available to a market researcher.
Existing tools for market research, such as conjoint studies, focus groups, and proprietary data
sets can be expensive. If LLMs can generate responses that are consistent with existing studies
on human subjects, then they may also be able to serve as a fast and low-cost method of
supplementing the information typically generated by conjoint studies and other customer
surveys. As major tech companies have begun to combine LLMs with tools for searching and
synthesizing information from the web, one might imagine using LLMs to develop marketing or
pricing strategies prior to the launch of a new product, and then iteratively querying LLMs over
time to evaluate product-market fit and modify the marketing strategy . In a way , consumers
are surveyed indirectly through their part in forming the text on which LLMs are trained.
We emphasize that, ex ante, it is unclear what we should expect to learn from GPT’s responses
to typical consumer survey questions. Product reviews, for example, which are likely present in
the training set for GPT , may reveal something about customers’ stated preferences for products
but may not always mention prices or other key attributes of the product or of the decision-
maker (e.g, income or demographics). When GPT is offered a $100 candy bar, will it know
to decline? When it is offered a choice between a $1 plain vanilla bar and a $2 chocolate
fudge bar, will it know how to make the trade-off? Moreover, even if GPT can generate rea-
sonable responses to each isolated question, will its responses across different questions be
internally consistent in the ways we expect consumers to be? Evaluating these issues is key to
understanding the potential value of GPT and other LLMs for almost any analysis of consumer
2

===PAGE BREAK===

preferences, and is the focus of this paper.
A priori, it is also unclear whether GPT’s training set can generate useful responses in this
context. A large literature documents the differences between customer surveys, which elicit
stated preferences over bundles of goods, and real-world demand data, in which customer pref-
erences are revealed by their actual choices. (See, for example, Kroes and Sheldon, 1988 and
Johnston et al., 2017.) GPT’s training set contains aspects of both: consumers comment on-
line about actual and prospective purchases. However, posted comments about purchases are
neither a representative sample of actual sales data nor prompted by typical consumer survey
questions. This aspect of the training set, together with the opacity with which LLMs responses
to prompts, motivates our investigation into the usefulness of LLMs for market research.
To quantify GPT’s efficacy in this setting, our empirical analysis attempts to approximate prob-
lems that market researchers might face in practice. In many cases, market research is used to
learn something about customers’ preferences, either for existing products and features, new
features for existing products, or entirely new product categories. In this context, “new” can
either refer to products /features for which the firm has little historical information or to in-
novative features which have never been created before. Moreover, marketers often care both
about the preferences of a generic market customer and about the segments of the market they
expect to target. With these use cases in mind, we design five surveys of human participants
that allow us to isolate the information set of a hypothetical market researcher and to explore
the performance of GPT in each case. We begin by studying GPT’s ability to simulate con-
sumer preferences in settings where the researcher has no prior information about the product
category , and then add multiple levels and forms of information about the products and cus-
tomers of interest, which come from our human surveys. These studies simulate the steps a
market researcher might take to use previous studies of the same or similar product markets
and customer segments to supplement GPT .
Our results are mixed and should be interpreted carefully . In our pilot studies, GPT’s implied
3

===PAGE BREAK===

WTP for fluoride in toothpaste and aluminum in deodorant fell within 50% of estimates from
a recent survey of real consumers conducted by Fong et al. (2023). In our main studies using
GPT-3.5 Turbo, we find that for many attributes GPT produces WTP estimates of similar sign
and order of magnitude to those from human surveys. However, important failures are also
common: GPT overestimates WTP for fluoride by roughly 3×, assigns the wrong sign to WTP
for new toothpaste flavors (cucumber, pancake) in the baseline, shows a negative WTP for
larger laptop screens in contrast to human preferences, and substantially misestimates brand
preferences for both Macbooks and iPads. Across different LLMs, we find substantial variation
in estimates, underscoring that results are not robust to model choice. Critically , in all of these
cases, a researcher lacking a human benchmark would have had no basis for identifying which
estimates were unreliable.
Fine-tuning GPT with human survey data from the same product category and population
substantially improves alignment, including for new features not present in the training data.
Fine-tuning with toothpaste data flips the (incorrect) signs on WTP for cucumber and pan-
cake flavors, and fine-tuning with laptop data brings GPT’s WTP for a built-in projector close
to the human estimate. These within-category extrapolation results are the most encouraging
finding in our paper. However, fine-tuning does not help, and in some cases worsens perfor-
mance, when the target involves a different product category , suggesting that the gains do not
generalize broadly . The implication is that the most defensible use of our approach is as an
extrapolation tool conditional on having relevant human survey data already in hand: a mar-
ket researcher who has conducted a survey on one set of product features may be able to use
fine-tuned GPT to generate preliminary estimates for new features within the same category
and population before investing in a full new human study .
We have not, in our investigation, been able to have GPT meaningfully reflect heterogeneous
preferences across demographic groups. We explore, through several distinct approaches,
whether GPT can reflect heterogeneity in WTP across multiple attributes including gender,
4

===PAGE BREAK===

income, and political affiliation, and conclude that even with our augmentation method, the
current state-of-the-art models of GPT better reflect average population WTP and do not pro-
vide meaningful across-group estimates.
Although our results show some promise, research in this area is preliminary , and more work is
needed to identify best practices and limitations for learning customer preferences from LLMs.
In Web Appendix A, we provide some guidance on the limitations of the approach and issues
we encountered while conducting our studies.
1.1 Existing Literature
A nascent but growing literature studies the economic benefits of LLMs from multiple angles.
Most relevant to our study is Horton (2023), which demonstrates that various LLMs provide
responses to classic behavioral economics experiments in ways that are consistent with intu-
ition and experience. Horton makes the distinction between stated and revealed preferences
and concludes that the corpus on which LLMs are trained is more likely comparable to revealed
preferences. He also compares GPT to a random number generator, which is related to our ap-
proach. We focus on the distribution of responses rather than a single draw. Subsequent work
in a variety of fields (e.g., Acerbi & Stubbersfield, 2023; Atari et al., 2024; Bisbee et al., 2024;
Dentella et al., 2023; Dominguez-Olmedo et al., 2023; Goli & Singh, 2024; Gui & Toubia, 2025)
examines the limitations of using LLMs as synthetic survey respondents, highlighting challenges
in response quality and reliability , and proposing solutions to mitigate these concerns. We add
to this literature by evaluating LLMs’ ability to extract customer preferences.
In the marketing field, prior work has identified specific means by which machine learning
(ML) and generative AI models can benefit marketing practice. Conceptually , the paper closest
to ours is Netzer et al. (2012), which extracts customer preferences from text. Timoshenko and
Hauser (2019), and Burnap et al. (2023) demonstrate how marketing managers can use ML/AI
approaches to improve the efficiency of intensive, manual, and costly processes. In the context
5

===PAGE BREAK===

of generative AI, Li et al. (2024) demonstrate how to use LLMs to construct perceptual maps
by querying them about brand similarities, and show that the responses are similar to those
of humans. Timoshenko et al. (2025) show that LLMs can extract customer needs from text
as well as or better than human experts. Arora et al. (2024) provide roadmaps for integrating
LLMs to enable hybrid human-AI collaborations in marketing research. We contribute to this
stream of the literature by further demonstrating how widely available generative AI tools may
be able extract consumer preferences.
2 Research Design
This section provides an overview of our research design, focusing on how we use GPT as a
tool for simulating human responses in market research. We detail our approach to querying
GPT , including the selection of the GPT-3.5 Turbo model for the majority of our studies, and
our methodology for evaluating its performance in reflecting consumer preferences. Addition-
ally , we explain our use of conjoint analysis to estimate willingness-to-pay (WTP) for product
attributes, both from human participants and GPT-generated responses. The section also ex-
plores how we simulate demographic heterogeneity and incorporate fine-tuning with existing
survey data to enhance GPT’s responses.
2.1 GPT
In this paper we focus on GPT as a cutting-edge example of the broader LLM technology . GPT
was developed by OpenAI and released publicly in 2020, and OpenAI maintains a public API
that makes it easy to submit many prompts quickly from common programming languages2 and
to receive many different responses at once for each prompt. One key difference between our
study and common illustrations of LLMs’ capabilities to date is our focus on the distributional
2For the majority of our studies, which we ran between April and July 2024, we used GPT model “gpt-3.5-
turbo-0125.” We also used the “text-davinci-003” for a few of our pilot studies, which ran in March 2023. We
typically access the API using Python. See Appendix A for a code sample.
6

===PAGE BREAK===

nature of LLM responses. Knowledge workers, for example, may use an LLM to accelerate
or improve their output because of its ability to reliably provide a valuable response quickly .
The process for querying LLMs in these contexts tends to consist of either autocomplete-style
responses, where the LLM provides only a single response to the worker, or a conversational
or interactive environment where the worker might purposefully submit similar queries a few
times in a row to explore different alternatives. However, this form of interaction with LLMs is
not ideal for understanding customer preferences, which is the focus of our work.
We use the GPT-3.5 Turbo (more formally , OpenAI’s “gpt-3.5-turbo-0125” model) as the main
model for our studies for two reasons. First, it was the latest model that was recommended by
OpenAI for fine tuning during the time we ran our human studies, a feature we were interested
in exploring, and we wanted to ensure all our results rely on the same GPT model.Second, GPT-
3.5 Turbo was OpenAI’s most cost-effective advanced model. 3 To examine the robustness of
our methodology to choice of GPT model, we also replicated one of our studies using a variety
of models from OpenAI, Meta, and Anthropic in Section 3.1.3.
2.2 GPT as a Simulator of Human Responses
Language models like GPT have been trained to predict text that would be written by hu-
mans, mostly on the internet, in response to a “prompt" which provides contextual information
(Ouyang et al., 2022). Our hypothesis is that, when we induce GPT (or other LLMs) to provide
a choice between products in a simulated market research study , the responses it provides re-
flect the learned distribution of responses from the consumers that compose its training data.
This is independent of GPT’s ability to produce factual information on request, and relies solely
on the assumption that a model that can accurately predict how humans respond to sufficiently
many contexts must also reveal some of the preferences of the humans it aims to represent. 4
3For GPT-3.5 Turbo the costs for API calls were (for 1M tokens): Input tokens: $0.50, Output tokens $1.50,
whereas GPT-4o they were: $5, and $15, respectively . Fine tuning token costs were significantly higher: Input:
$3, Output: $6, whereas fine tuning a model costs were only $8 for 1M training tokens.
4“Hallucination" is the term used to describe cases where LLMs produces incorrect information, which is often
of interest when using LLMs via chat-based interfaces or LLM-augmented search. Because we are not querying
7

===PAGE BREAK===

Hence, our approach to performing market research using GPT is to treat the model as a tool
for predicting real consumer responses to surveys rather than a source of knowledge.
There are several reasons why we might expect this approach to work. GPT’s training corpus
includes vast amounts of consumer-generated content — product reviews, forum discussions,
and social media posts — in which consumers express views about products, compare alterna-
tives, and discuss prices. A model trained to predict text in these contexts may have implicitly
learned relationships between product attributes and consumer reactions that are informative
about underlying preferences. Moreover, if the corpus is large and diverse enough, the model
may have encountered the kinds of trade-offs that conjoint analysis is designed to elicit, even
if those trade-offs were never stated in the form of a survey question.
At the same time, there are also compelling reasons to expect it to fail. The corpus is not a repre-
sentative sample of consumers or of consumer decisions: online reviewers are self-selected, and
the products and attributes that attract commentary are not a random draw from the space of
market research questions. Preferences are rarely stated directly in the form of willingness-to-
pay , and the mapping from next-token prediction to preference primitives is opaque. Therefore,
there is no theoretical guarantee that a model optimized to predict text will recover econom-
ically meaningful or internally consistent preference estimates. Moreover, online discourse
reflects what consumers actually did and experienced, which is closer to revealed preferences,
whereas conjoint surveys elicit stated preferences. If GPT inherits the revealed-preference ori-
entation of its training corpus, its responses may diverge systematically from stated-preference
benchmarks. Finally , because LLMs are pre-trained on a fixed corpus, the preferences they may
encode are static. Therefore, they would reflect consumer sentiment as of the training cutoff
and cannot adapt to shifts in the market, the competitive landscape, or consumer tastes that
occur afterward.
Other recent work has demonstrated early success using GPT as a tool to simulate human
GPT for facts, we do not consider hallucination to be of critical importance for our research question.
8

===PAGE BREAK===

responses. Horton (2023) conducts economic experiments using GPT-3, Argyle et al. (2023)
simulate samples of political preferences, and Aher et al. (2022) simulate psychological studies
including the well-known Milgram shock experiment. These studies focus on comparing the
distributions of simulated responses to those from humans and in general find encouraging
similarities between the two. While this type of comparison is also an interest of this paper, we
emphasize that some of our results demonstrate a deeper, emergent, level of human simulation.
Market research concerns not only what customers will say about their preferences, but what
their choices reveal about those underlying preferences when economic models are estimated
using the resulting data. Analysis of the latter involves subjecting humans to multiple questions
with different contexts, and requires humans to behave in ways that are, for the most part,
internally consistent. Thus, while we expect that GPT’s responses to marketing questions will
be qualitatively similar to humans, key questions still remain as to whether GPT’s responses to
these types of market research surveys will provide estimates of preferences that are realistic
and consistent with estimates using human-generated data.
2.3 Querying GPT for Market Research
At a high level, our research design considers the problem of a market researcher seeking
to estimate consumer preferences when they are unable to conduct new human surveys that
directly address the customers or products of interest but may have related data from previous
surveys. We consider two ways in which GPT can help the researcher in this setting. First,
they may survey GPT directly and use that survey data heuristically as a supplement to other
human studies. Second, they may wish to supplement GPT’s knowledge with available data
and to focus GPT’s responses on a desired target population. In these cases, they may wish to
find ways to incorporate surveys run by their firm in the past, in settings that are distinct but
similar to their current focus. In this section, we outline our strategy for evaluating GPT for
both of these use cases.
9

===PAGE BREAK===

We focus on the specific problem of estimating WTP for product attributes, a task that often falls
to market researchers. To calculate WTP for the attributes we study , we recover preferences
for attributes and for prices using the conjoint analysis paradigm. Conjoint is widely used in
academia and industry for estimating customer WTP , and has been shown to be able to uncover
customer preferences for different product attributes jointly (see Green and Srinivasan, 1978
and Green and Srinivasan, 1990 for a review). Another reason we choose to focus on WTP for
product attributes rather than for products is that compared to WTP for products, WTPs for
attributes are much less likely to to be stated directly on product pages or in reviews and to
thereby appear in GPT’s corpus.5
We studied multiple approaches to soliciting preferences and determined that conjoint-style
questions were most likely to elicit useful results from GPT . Direct solicitation of WTP for prod-
uct attributes is not the typical method for human-based market research, as humans’ ability to
quantify these measures is limited. Here, we are using GPT as a simulator of human responses,
and therefore we anticipated that the workhorse indirect elicitation methods used on humans
are also most likely to be successful with GPT . Nevertheless, prior to focusing on conjoint anal-
ysis we tested GPT’s ability to provide WTP for attributes directly and through a relatively
simple indirect method described in Web Appendix C. The direct elicitation method produced
implausible estimates: for both fluoride in toothpaste and the removal of aluminum in deodor-
ant, GPT returned a median WTP of $1.00, suggesting the method was neither meaningfully
discriminating between attributes nor reflecting genuine preferences. The indirect method,
which compares implied demand curves across goods with and without the attribute, per-
formed somewhat better but also yielded values substantially below the human benchmarks
(e.g., $1.19 for fluoride, compared to $3.27 in Fong et al. (2023)). The conjoint approach pro-
duced the most reasonable and internally consistent estimates, which were closest to the Fong
et al. (2023) human studies benchmark. This was also consistent with our a priori expectation:
5In Web Appendix B we demonstrate that the distribution of WTP for products generates realistic values for
multiple categories of goods. We note the concern that GPT’s output reflects the distribution of listed prices rather
than consumer WTP , which further motivates our focus on WTP for product features.
10

===PAGE BREAK===

the indirect trade-off structure of a conjoint question is closer to how we hypothesized the LLM
would most reliably reveal preferences as it directly compared alternatives. We therefore use
conjoint for the remainder of the paper.
To evaluate GPT’s ability to provide meaningful and realistic WTP , we collect responses to
(nearly) identical questions from both GPT and humans. We compare these responses to each
other and proceed to examine GPT’s ability to reflect consumer heterogeneity . Finally , we
evaluate whether and when using existing human surveys to supplement GPT may improve its
outputs.
2.3.1 Baseline Human Studies
In order to test the capabilities of GPT in market research applications, we require a reason-
able baseline of responses to which we can compare GPT’s output. While traditional conjoint
surveys have well-known shortcomings in reflecting actual consumer preferences, we rely on
human surveys as the best available benchmark, as well as the most relevant to marketers. We
use two baselines for customer preferences in lieu of “ground truth.” First, as a pilot study , we
use existing research by Fong et al. (2023), who conduct a real-world conjoint in late 2020 to
estimate WTP for household consumer goods and confirmed that their estimates are consistent
with market outcomes, as our baseline for comparison. We ran GPT studies in the spirit of Fong
et al. (2023) in March 2023 using the most recent GPT model at that time (text-davinci-003).
Importantly , that model’s training corpus could not include the results of the Fong et al. (2023)
studies given the training cutoff time.
Second, after the pilot study’s initial encouraging results, we collected a new set of human con-
joint surveys to broaden our investigation, estimate preferences for sub-groups of customers,
study new product features, and fine-tune GPT . Toward this end, we began by running five
new human studies covering three categories of consumer products: toothpaste, laptops, and
tablets. Three of our studies (1A, 2A, 2C) include product features that already exist and are
11

===PAGE BREAK===

thus likely to be in GPT’s training corpus, and two studies (1B, 2B) that include new, hypothet-
ical product features. While we use all of the studies to evaluate GPT’s baseline responses, we
use the latter studies as a human benchmark to evaluate GPT’s performance for new features,
with and without fine-tuning, as we explain in Section 2.3.4.
All of our studies are outlined in Table 1, and the specific attribute levels used in our studies
are outlined in Table 2. In each of these studies, through Prolific we recruited 300 participants
18 or older who reside in the US. Participants responded to 12 choice tasks in which they were
asked first to choose their preferred option between two product configurations and then to
indicate whether they are interested in purchasing their selection or prefer not to purchase any
item at this time.6 Study materials are available in Web Appendix D.
Table 1: List of Conjoint Studies
Study Product category Product attributes Comparison human sample
Pilot study A Toothpaste Fluoride 401 participants, Fong et al. (2023)
Pilot study B Deodorant Aluminum 155 participants, Fong et al. (2023)
Study 1A Toothpaste Fluoride, conventional flavors 300 participants, this paper
Study 1B Toothpaste Study 1A + unusual flavors 302 participants, this paper
Study 2A Laptop Storage, RAM, Screen size 302 participants, this paper
Study 2B Laptop Study 2A + Built-in Projector 300 participants, this paper
Study 2C Tablet Storage, RAM, Screen size 300 participants, this paper
Notes: All studies include also brands and price attributes. All human studies were implemented using
Sawtooth Discover software and distributed via Prolific. The human studies in Fong et al. (2023) were
conducted in September 2020, and the human studies in this paper were conducted in April 2024.
2.3.2 Baseline GPT Preferences
As in much of the empirical marketing and industrial organization literature, we wish to study
the impact of changes in the attributes of goods on choice probabilities and market shares,
which normally requires data from many randomly sampled customers or markets. For each
set of goods we consider, we query GPT dozens of times as our goal is for GPT to generate a
distribution of responses rather than produce a single one. To this end, we set the “temper-
ature” on GPT to its default value (1.0) 7 for all studies in an attempt to maximize variation
6We borrow the design of first collecting preferences and only then purchase intent from Brazell et al. (2006).
7The possible temperature values are 0–2, where the maximum is 2.0, which generates “creative” responses.
12

===PAGE BREAK===

Table 2: Conjoint Design Attribute Levels
Attribute Toothpaste Deodorant Laptop Tablet
Brand Colgate /Crest Dove /Speed Stick Microsoft Surface Laptop / Microsoft Surface/
Apple Macbook Air Apple iPad
Price $0.99 /$1.99/$2.99 $1.99 /$2.99/$3.99 $1,000 /$1,200/$1,400 $450 /$550/$650
Ingredient Fluoride (Yes /No) Aluminum (Yes /No)
Flavor Mint /Cinnamon/
Strawberry
Storage 256GB /512GB/1T 64GB /128GB/256GB
RAM 8GB /16GB/32GB 4GB /8GB
Size 13 in /15 in 8 in /10 in
New Pancake /Cucumber Built-in projector
features flavors (Yes /No)
Notes: The pilot studies included only brand, price, and ingredient. The brands and prices for toothpaste and
deodorant were taken from Fong et al. (2023), and the laptop and tablet attributes were selected based on products
available at the time the human studies were conducted (April 2024). New features were included only in studies
1B and 2B.
across responses.8
Our prompting approach then proceeds as follows. In each study , we prompt GPT to fill in the
responses to survey questions as if it were a customer shopping in a category of interest who
was randomly selected to participate in a survey . We may also indicate customer attributes
(e.g., annual income). We offer two products for this customer to consider purchasing, and
remind the customer that they can always choose not to make a purchase. We record and
parse each free form text response.9 We submit each of these prompts to GPT dozens of times
and aggregate the responses to construct our measures of interest. In crafting the prompts
for our querying approach, our main goal was to explore and demonstrate ways to use GPT
as a market research tool rather than to optimize prompts to achieve a particularly level of
accuracy or reliability . We discuss key learnings about GPT prompts in Web Appendix A, and
leave prompt engineering and optimization for future work.
8We echo Horton (2023)’s observation that “ ‘natural’ human variation in preferences does not exist in LLMs
unless they are endowed with differences.” How setting the temperature in LLMs and thus increasing stochasticity
relates to random sampling of human subjects is an interesting question that we leave for future work.
9To convert GPT’s free-form text responses into structured choice data, we use a combination of regular ex-
pressions and parsing code tailored to the typical response patterns we observed. We drop responses in which
the LLM did not make an identifiable choice, such as cases where it replied “As an AI assistant, I don’t have the
ability to make purchases,” or where it simply repeated the prompt back rather than selecting an option. Across
our studies, fewer than 1% of responses were discarded on these grounds.
13

===PAGE BREAK===

Typical conjoint studies require generating choice sets that are orthogonal across configurations
and balancing attributes across choices. Study participants are then presented with 10–15 sce-
narios comparing 2–3 products from the full set of configurations. Because, unlike humans,
GPT is not constrained by time or the ability to perform complex comparisons, we chose to gen-
erate the full set of options for each set of attributes and create a full-factorial design for each
of our conjoint studies. Using this approach, we run GPT-based conjoint studies for toothpaste,
laptops, and tablets to correspond with our human studies (see Tables 1 and 2 for details).
The exact prompts we use for all of our studies and other design details are available in Web
Appendix E. A sample prompt is provided in Appendix B, and sample responses are available
in Web Appendix F.
We designed our GPT studies to be as similar as possible to our human studies. In our pilot
studies, because we didn’t have individual-level human data against which to compare GPT
responses, we indicated customer income in our prompts (chosen to be the median income
from the US Census, similar to the Fong et al. (2023) sample). For simplicity , while we were
inspired by the Fong et al. (2023) design, we varied only brand, price, and fluoride content,
and kept “whitening” constant in all prompts. We also only had GPT consider choice sets with
two different brands.
For the remainder of our baseline GPT studies, we removed customer income from the baseline
GPT prompts to make them more general, 10 and we also ran a full factorial conjoint on GPT ,
including the brand attribute. With respect to number of queries for each consideration set,
while we initially collected 300 responses for each consideration set in our pilot studies, we col-
lected only 150 responses for our main studies and then only 50 responses, as we learned that
GPT’s responses are consistent at smaller sample sizes (see Web Appendix G for details).
10We revisit this approach when exploring heterogeneity , as described in Section 2.3.3.
14

===PAGE BREAK===

2.3.3 Exploring Heterogeneity in Preferences
Market researchers interested in customer heterogeneity often analyze survey responses from
different subgroups based on demographics, behavior, or other characteristics. To emulate
this type of analysis, we collect a set of demographic characteristics at the end of our human
conjoint surveys. We use this data to construct different customer segments and compare WTP
between these groups. We then use GPT to simulate responses from equivalent subsamples
of customers by adapting the prompt to include relevant demographic features (e.g., income,
gender, or race). We compare the preferences implied by responses of a particular human
segment to its corresponding GPT segment.
We collect self-identified information on gender, age, race/ethnicity , political affiliation, house-
hold income, and education level in each of our human studies. Our participant pool is similar
to the US population in terms of gender and race, but tends to be younger, more educated,
more likely to identify as Democrats, and lower income compared to the general population.
See Table W1 in Web Appendix D for details.
2.3.4 Fine-tuning with Relevant Context
Practitioners conducting market research on new products, features, or customer segments
may have access to previous studies on similar or adjacent products, features, and customer
segments. We incorporate these prior surveys by fine-tuning GPT and in doing so we modify
GPT’s weights directly .11 Specifically , our approach to fine-tuning is to transform the responses
from the prior human surveys into a new set of prompts and response pairs that are identical
in format to our GPT prompts, which we describe in Section 2.3.2. Unlike our typical prompts,
where we simply query GPT and collect the response, in our training data we provide pairs of
11In theory , there are many ways to provide contextual information from prior market research to GPT . One
could, for example, directly include quoted customer responses, or summaries of survey data, in preambles ap-
pended to the beginning of GPT prompts. Alternatively , as has become popular in agent-based models, one may
provide survey materials as documents that GPT has access to and use retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)
(Lewis et al., 2020), with the aim of producing responses informed by the additional information.
15

===PAGE BREAK===

prompts and responses, constructed based on the choice tasks and the responses of the partici-
pants in the study . We show an example of this construction process in Figure 1. Following this
format, we use our entire existing human study to fine-tune GPT . 12 For example, for a study
with 300 participants and 12 questions each, we use 3,600 responses to fine-tune GPT .
In our fine-tuning studies, we use human responses from Study 1A (conventional toothpaste)
to fine-tune GPT and evaluate its responses to Study 1B (toothpaste with new and unusual
flavors), and similarly , we use responses from Study 2A (laptop) to fine-tune GPT and evaluate
its responses to Study 2B (laptop with a new feature) and 2C (tablet with different levels of
the same attributes as the laptop).
Figure 1: Converting Human Survey Response to Fine-tuning Input Material
{"messages": [
{"role": "system",
"content": "You are a customer..." },
{"role": "user",
"content": "While Shopping, you see...
1. Microsoft Surface Laptop, Price:$1400,
RAM:8GB, Storage:256GB, Size:13in
2. Apple MacBook Air, Price:$1000,
RAM:8GB, Storage:1000GB, Size:15in...
Did you purchase either of the available
laptops? If so, which one?" },
{"role": "assistant",
"content": "15in MacBook for $1000,
1000GB of storage, 8GB of RAM" }
]}
Notes: This figure presents an example of our conversion from the human study responses to data which can be
provided to GPT for fine-tuning. The human respondent in this case chose to purchase the Macbook Air, which we
convert to a text response in the assistant’s “content" field to send to GPT . Our fine-tuning data, on the right hand
side, includes our description of the setting (a customer who is randomly selected while shopping), the available
products, and the customer’s choice (complete system and user prompts appear in Web Appendix E).
12We used OpenAI’s default fine-tuning hyperparameters.
16

===PAGE BREAK===

3 Results
In this section, we present results from studies designed to assess the usefulness of GPT-based
conjoint studies as a tool for market research. We begin with results that show how estimates
of WTP derived from GPT responses compare with those derived from human surveys. Next,
we present results on GPT’s performance in representing consumer heterogeneity . Finally , we
show that fine-tuning GPT with human surveys can result in GPT responses more consistent
with those of humans’, including on choices involving new product features.
3.1 Recovering Baseline GPT Preferences via Conjoint
Our first set of results evaluates the ability of GPT to produce responses that reflect consumers’
WTP for product attributes without any supplemental contextual information beyond what
is contained in brief survey prompts. Our goal here is to assess GPT as a tool for market
researchers to generate a baseline estimate of the rank and magnitude of customers’ WTP
in settings where no historical surveys are available. For this, we present the results of three
different exercises. First, we report GPT’s implied preferences for basic attributes of toothpaste
and deodorant, comparing GPT’s output to results from humans in Fong et al. (2023). Second,
we compare GPT’s WTP for toothpaste, laptop, and tablet attributes to our human studies,
focusing on attributes that existed prior to GPT’s launch. Finally , we turn our attention to new
features, comparing GPT’s and humans’ preferences for a built-in laptop projector and to new
and unusual toothpaste flavors.
3.1.1 Pilot Studies
Our first set of results, which survey GPT’s preferences for toothpaste and deodorant, are shown
in Table 3. In these conjoint studies, we created the full set of options for each brand: three
price levels for each of the attribute options, yielding a total of 36 configurations. As detailed
in Table 2, our conjoint design is inspired by the choices in Fong et al. (2023). We use the top
17

===PAGE BREAK===

two brands for each product category , have three price levels for each of the goods, and two
attribute levels for fluoride and aluminum content (with, without).
Table 3: Pilot Study Conjoint Results
Toothpaste Deodorant
(1) (2)
Price -0.484 -0.692
Attribute 1.647 -0.685
Brand 1 Dummy -0.801 0.229
Brand 2 Dummy -0.491 -0.678
Observations 10,800 10,800
Notes: Attribute=“fluoride” in Column 1 and “aluminum” in
Column 2; Brand dummies are “Colgate” (1) and “Crest” (2)
for toothpaste, and “Dove” (1) and “Speed Stick” (2) for de-
odorant.
Here we present estimated utility parameters from our two studies, which were conducted in
March 2023 using the text-davinci-003 model through OpenAI’s GPT API, as well as the implied
WTP for aluminum in deodorant and fluoride in toothpaste, which we estimate using a multi-
nomial logit choice model. We calculate the WTP using the estimates from the choice model
by dividing the attribute coefficient by the absolute value of the price coefficient. We note that
LLM responses are simulation-based responses, and are therefore akin to counterfactual sim-
ulation responses. However, unlike most settings, we know neither the data used to estimate
the LLMs nor the model structure, meaning we have no way to precisely characterize sampling
uncertainty arising from the LLM. We therefore do not report standard errors for LLM-based es-
timates throughout the paper. Characterizing sampling variance for LLM-generated data raises
unique challenges that are beyond the scope of this paper. More fundamentally , the number of
queries submitted to the LLM is a researcher design choice rather than a sampling constraint.
As we show in Web Appendix G, estimates are stable even at a small fraction of our sample
size. Standard errors computed as if LLM responses came from a random sample of consumers
would shrink toward zero with additional queries. However, increasing the number of queries
cannot resolve the more fundamental question of whether the LLM’s responses correspond to
actual human preferences, which is an issue of validity rather than precision.
We estimate that consumers are willing to pay , on average, $3.40 to add fluoride to toothpaste
18

===PAGE BREAK===

and $0.91 to remove aluminum from deodorant. 13 These studies, which were modeled after
those in Fong et al. (2023), compare favorably to that baseline. Fong et al. (2023) found that
consumers are willing to pay $3.27 on average for fluoride and -$1.97 for aluminum, meaning
that in both cases our estimates come within 50% of theirs. This is notable because, in addition
to allowing us to match our estimates from GPT to a human sample outside of the surveys we
ran ourselves, Fong et al. (2023) also showed that the estimates and market shares from their
survey matched real market outcomes.
3.1.2 Main Studies
Now we move to our second set of results, which compare GPT to our new set of human stud-
ies. For these main studies we use GPT-3.5 Turbo. Broadly , we find that GPT performs well at
approximating human preferences in some contexts, and struggles in others. First, we exam-
ine the toothpaste studies (Studies 1A and 1B). Our estimates for WTP for each attribute are
illustrated in Figure 2. Our figures include 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for WTP estimated
from human studies, but not for LLMs.
Our results from GPT in Study 1A very nearly rank all of the attributes correctly . We find that
the brand value of Crest, relative to Colgate, is small relative to all other attributes, although
we did find that GPT’s WTP differed in sign from humans (the CI for humans includes zero). Es-
timates of WTP from GPT for cinnamon and strawberry toothpaste flavors (relative to the mint
baseline) are both correctly signed and of a similar magnitude to estimates from our surveys
of humans, although GPT’s WTP for strawberry flavor is more negative than humans’.
The main difference between humans and GPT in this study is that GPT has higher WTP for
fluoride. Our findings in Study 1B are similar, with GPT reflecting higher value for fluoride
and greater distaste for non-mint flavors. At the same time, we note that the estimates of WTP
13To evaluate the stability of estimates over different models of GPT , we repeated this exact toothpaste study
design on GPT-3.5 Turbo. We found slightly higher WTP , at $4.42. We then also examined the WTP when the
income of the customer is not mentioned, and found that it increases to $4.95, suggesting that GPT’s “generic”
customer is wealthier.
19

===PAGE BREAK===

for fluoride from the human study are comparable to the estimate from Fong et al. (2023)
(estimates of humans’ WTP for fluoride are $2.60 and $2.90 in Studies 1A and 1B, respectively).
We also find that GPT’s WTP for fluoride ($8.20 and $9.30 in Studies 1A and 1B) is almost twice
as large as what we found when replicating the pilot study on GPT-3.5 Turbo (between $4.42
and $4.95). We believe that this is likely due to adapting the prompts to include the full factorial
design (including brands), and to adding additional attributes to the prompt (flavors), which
alter GPT preferences but not human preferences. We discuss the sensitivity of our results to
the specific LLM used below (Sections 3.1.3 and 3.3).
Next, when evaluating new flavors in Study 1B, GPT differs from human data in assessing the
sign of WTP for our brand new toothpaste flavors, cucumber and pancake. This is somewhat
surprising, given GPT’s consistent assessment of WTP for strawberry and cinnamon flavors,
which exist but are significantly less popular flavors for toothpaste than mint. Based on GPT’s
responses, we believe some of the differences can be explained by its preference for new prod-
uct trials, as we found that GPT was more likely to opt out of purchasing (relative to Study 1A)
when it was not offered the new toothpaste flavors (see Web Appendix F for selected prompts
illustrating this point). We discuss these results in more depth below.
Next, we move to our results on consumer electronics, which are presented in Figure 3. In
Study 2A, we see that GPT-3.5 Turbo is consistent with human data in ranking customers’
WTP for storage and RAM, and produces estimates within 64%–90% of our human sample’s
estimated WTP . The same is true in Study 2B, in which we survey a new sample of human
respondents. In contrast, in both studies, GPT’s responses imply a negative WTP for the Mac-
book brand relative to the alternative, whereas humans in both studies suggest a significantly
higher preference for the brand. We see a similar comparison in Study 2C (Tablets), where
GPT also has a relatively low preference for iPads. In this case, GPT does however sign this
value similarly to human data and is within $50 (67%) of our human estimate. However, GPT’s
estimates of WTP for other attributes (Storage, RAM, and Size) are substantially larger than
20

===PAGE BREAK===

Figure 2: Results of Toothpaste Studies
−$5
$0
$5
$10
Crest Fluoride Strawberry Cinnamon
Attribute
WTP
Model
Human
GPT−3.5 Turbo
(a) Study 1A: Toothpaste
−$5
$0
$5
$10
Crest Fluoride Strawberry Cinnamon Cucumber Pancake
Attribute
WTP
Model
Human
GPT−3.5 Turbo
GPT−FT Study 1A
(b) Study 1B: Toothpaste with New Flavors
Notes: Estimated WTP for humans and LLMs for Studies 1A and 1B. Brackets indicate 95% confidence intervals
on our estimates from the human study . GPT-FT represents a fine-tuned GPT model.
humans’ WTP for these attributes (70%–312% larger, and outside of the 95% CI). When ex-
ploring the new feature of a “built-in projector” in Study 2B, we again find that GPT’s WTP for
the new feature appears to be higher than humans’ WTP for this feature by almost 3X.
With respect to screen size in laptops, we find that, in contrast to humans who prefer a larger
21

===PAGE BREAK===

screen size, GPT suggests a negative WTP in both Study 2A and 2B. Upon further exploration,
we found that this is due to our design choices – it turns out that GPT prefers a laptop screen
size of 13 inches (over both smaller and larger sizes), and because our options only included
13 and 15 inches it generated a negative WTP for this attribute.14
Overall, we find that for many of the attributes, GPT-3.5 Turbo produces WTP estimates that
are of similar order of magnitude and sign as our human sample; however, there exist some
substantial differences for some attributes. Therefore, at their baseline form, GPT’s responses
can be seen as a useful signal, but not as a replacement to human responses, as they may lead
to wrong conclusions especially about new features (e.g., GPT results suggest that humans will
like the “pancake” toothpaste flavor). In Section 3.3 we examine whether providing additional
data may help GPT produce responses more similar to those of humans.
3.1.3 Robustness to the Choice of LLM
In this section we examine whether and to what extent the reliability of LLMs for market
research depends on the choice of LLM, which we view as closely related to the stability of
results from a single LLM over time. We address this question by replicating our analysis
of our Study 2A 15 using GPT-4o, Claude 3 Haiku, Claude 3.5 Sonnet, and LLaMA-3 (8B and
70B).16 Figure 4 presents the results. For ease of comparison, the LLMs are ordered by model
size, starting with LLaMA-2 8B to GPT-4o. Comparisons between these models highlight some
notable differences. In general, it appears that responses from GPT-3.5 Turbo and GPT-4o much
more closely approximate the responses we see in our human sample than do those of Claude
and LLaMA-8B. In general, LLaMA-8B understates human preferences significantly (perhaps
14To examine this, we ran a test that kept most attributes stable and only varied prices, brands, and sizes, and
found that the ideal size for GPT was 13 inches. We later also tested this for GPT-4o and found that it prefers a
15-inch screen (when screen sizes varied between 11 and 17 inches).
15We evaluate robustness using our laptop studies because they include a larger set of attributes than our
toothpaste studies.
16In our replication studies, we use 50 repetitions per prompt (total of 288,900) for each LLM, except for
the LLaMA 70B model that only has 2 repetitions per prompt (11,556 prompts total) due to the computational
intensity of running this Open Source model locally .
22

===PAGE BREAK===

Figure 3: Results of Laptop and Tablet Studies
$0
$50
$100
$150
MacBook Storage RAM Size
Attribute
WTP
Model
Human
GPT−3.5 Turbo
(a) Study 2A: Laptops
$0
$400
$800
$1,200
MacBook Storage RAM Size Projector
Attribute
WTP
Model
Human
GPT−3.5 Turbo
GPT−FT Study 2A
(b) Study 2B: Laptops with Built-In Projector
$0
$100
$200
$300
$400
iPad Storage RAM Size
Attribute
WTP
Model
Human
GPT−3.5 Turbo
GPT−FT Study 2A
(c) Study 2C: Tablets
Notes: Estimated WTP for humans and LLMs for Studies 2A, 2B, and 2C. Brackets indicate 95% confidence in-
tervals on our estimates from the human study . The reported WTP for screen size and RAM are for one unit
(inch/GB), and for Storage it is for 128GB. GPT-FT represents a fine-tuned GPT model.
23

===PAGE BREAK===

because it is the smallest model); Claude suffers less from this problem, but its preference for
Macbooks appears to far exceed humans’ and other models’ preferences, and its preference for
screen size is the farthest from humans among all of the models’. Even between GPT-4o and
GPT-3.5 Turbo there are some notable differences, such as their assessments of WTP for the
Macbook brand, and their preference for screen size. We find a similar pattern when running
Study 2B using GPT-4o, where the implied WTP estimate is roughly $333, relative to GPT-
3.5’s implied estimate of about $1074. The substantial variation in estimates across models is
consistent with the uncertainty we raised in Section 2: the mapping from next-token prediction
to preference primitives appears fragile, sensitive to both model architecture and training data,
rather than a stable reflection of underlying consumer preferences.
In practice, researchers likely want any LLM augmentation of market research to be grounded
in existing data whenever possible, and only supplemented by the LLM when extrapolation
beyond the available data is needed. Given sufficient contextual data in the form of fine-
tuning, our hypothesis is that some of the differences between LLMs would shrink. We discuss
the impact of such fine-tuning approaches on the insights gleaned from GPT surveys, both
in-context and out-of-context, in Section 3.3.
3.2 Examining Heterogeneity in WTP
A critical element in survey design is defining the target population. We are interested in
understanding GPT’s ability to reflect the preferences of different populations. To this end, we
rely on the population of our human studies who were Prolific participants residing in the US
and aged 18 or older. To better understand GPT’s ability to mimic the preferences of different
populations, we collected demographic data from humans (see Web Appendix D for details),
estimated WTP separately for each demographic group, and then submitted queries to GPT
corresponding to each group. In particular, we modified our prompts to indicate customer
income, gender, or race. See Web Appendix E for details.
24

===PAGE BREAK===

Figure 4: Results of Laptop Study Across LLMs
$0
$100
$200
$300
MacBook Storage RAM Size
Attribute
WTP
Model
Human
LLaMA−3 8B
Claude 3 (Haiku)
LLaMA−3 70B
Claude 3.5 (Sonnet)
GPT−3.5 Turbo
GPT−4o
Notes: Estimated WTP for humans and multiple LLMs for Study 2A. Brackets indicate
95% confidence intervals on our estimates from the human study . The reported WTP
for screen size and RAM are for one unit (inch/GB), and for Storage it is for 128GB.
LLMs are presented in order of the number of parameters, starting with LLaMA-3 (8
Billion) to GPT-4o (roughly 200 Billin).
25

===PAGE BREAK===

We use Study 2A for our investigation of customer heterogeneity . In our human studies, we
found that within a particular demographic split (e.g., income), there was relatively little vari-
ation in WTP for RAM or storage or the fraction of those choosing not to purchase (which was
around 50% across all groups, aside from Black participants, whose opt-out rates were only
37%). Meanwhile, GPT reflected large variation between demographic groups for these mea-
sures. For example, for the income groups below $50,000 and above $150,000, WTP for RAM
among humans was $17.80 and $19.40, respectively , whereas the GPT-based estimates were
-$4.40 and $99.60, respectively . GPT also had an opt-out rate of 95% for the lower income
group and 34% for the higher income group, whereas the corresponding opt-out rates among
humans were 49% and 47%. A comparison of human- and GPT-implied WTP across groups is
available in Web Appendix G.17
In our human surveys we find that WTP for screen size and for the Macbook product (relative
to Surface), varied more substantially between groups relative to other attributes. For clarity
of presentation, we focus our figures on these two variables. Figure 5 presents the comparison
between the estimated WTP based on humans and on GPT for the different groups. An inter-
esting patterns emerges for comparisons between groups by income, gender, politics, and race
and ethnicity (but not for education or age) for Macbook WTP (but not for screen size): while
GPT estimates are of different magnitudes and signs compared to those from humans, GPT
does seem to reflect consistent ordering between the groups. For example, in our human sam-
ple WTP for Macbook increases from $12.50 to $225.60 with the increase in income bracket,
and GPT’s WTP increase from -$2.60 to $722.52. However, it seems that GPT generalizes this
order to all the attributes (i.e., to storage and RAM), differently from what we see in data
from humans. Focusing on gender, which has the largest split in our humans samples (44%
of respondents identified as male and 54% as female) and smallest CI, GPT WTP estimates for
Macbook are within the CI, but this is not the case for screen size or other attributes.
17Throughout our analyses, GPT always implies a negative price coefficient, except for the case of higher income
(above $150,000) customers, where the price coefficient is positive.
26

===PAGE BREAK===

Figure 5: Study 2A WTP by Demographic Groups
Race and Ethnicity Education Age
Income Gender Political Affiliation
White Black No College College Age < 28 [28−42] Age > 42
<$50k $50−74k $75−150k >$150k Male Female Republican Democrat
−$200
$0
$200
$400
−$100
$0
$100
$200
−$100
$0
$100
$200
−$100
$0
$100
$200
$0
$200
$400
$600
−$200
−$100
$0
$100
$200
$300
WTP
Model Human GPT
(a) Macbook Preference (over Surface)
Race and Ethnicity Education Age
Income Gender Political Affiliation
White Black No College College Age < 28 [28−42] Age > 42
<$50k $50−74k $75−150k >$150k Male Female Republican Democrat
$0
$50
$100
$150
$0
$50
$100
$150
$0
$50
$100
$0
$50
$100
$0
$50
$100
$150
$0
$50
$100 WTP
Model Human GPT
(b) Screen Size
Notes: Estimated WTP for Macbook relative to Surface and for screen size, estimated separately for six demo-
graphic splits. Brackets indicate the 95% confidence interval on the estimated WTP from our human sample. GPT
represents WTP estimates based on GPT-3.5 Turbo responses.
Overall, we find that GPT reflects some differences between customer groups found in human
samples but fails to reflect others. Specifically , it does not reflect preferences of any particular
group very well. This is in contrast to what we find in Section 3.1, where “off-the-shelf” GPT-3.5
27

===PAGE BREAK===

Turbo provides similar average WTP estimates across the entire population for several product
attributes.
One possible interpretation of these differences between GPT and humans deserves discus-
sion. Human conjoint responses reflect stated preferences — what consumers say they would
choose in hypothetical scenarios — and a long literature documents that stated preferences
can diverge from actual purchasing behavior, a phenomenon often referred to as hypotheti-
cal bias. As Horton (2023) notes, the text corpora on which LLMs are trained are arguably
closer to revealed preferences, since they consist largely of discourse around actual purchases,
experiences, and choices rather than responses to survey prompts. Under this view, some of
the mismatches we document between GPT and human responses may not indicate LLM fail-
ure but rather a difference in the underlying preference object being measured. The strong
income conditioning we observe in GPT is a natural candidate: in real purchasing behavior,
budget constraints meaningfully shape choices over expensive electronics, while conjoint re-
spondents may answer as if such constraints do not bind because the decision is hypothetical.
In other words, when LLM estimates diverge from human conjoint estimates, one interpreta-
tion is not necessarily that the LLM is wrong. It may instead be that LLM- and the human-based
conjoint studies are measuring related but distinct preference objects, and the practical value
of each depends on what the researcher ultimately wants to predict. That said, whatever the
interpretation, our results do not support using LLM-based conjoint studies as a substitute for
human studies at this stage. In the next section, we investigate whether supplementing GPT
with additional information may improve its ability to reflect preferences derived from human
data.
3.3 Supplementing GPT-3.5 Turbo with Fine-Tuning
Having documented encouraging but mixed results from surveying GPT without providing any
additional information, we now move to exploring how GPT responds to being fine-tuned with
28

===PAGE BREAK===

related surveys from a target population. We focus on two questions as our measures of success:
(1) Does fine-tuning yield better alignment between GPT and humans on the products and fea-
tures included in the fine-tuning data? (2) How does GPT perform on out-of-sample questions,
including both similar but related product categories and new product features?
To study both these questions, we fine-tune GPT with human survey data from one study ,
and then query GPT with questions from another study . Beginning with the first of our two
questions, we fine-tune GPT with a study on existing products (toothpaste or laptops) and
then query it about products in the same category with new features (new flavors or a built-in
projector). We look first to our results from Study 1B, in which we fine-tuned GPT using Study
1A (see Figure 2b), and Study 2B, where we fine-tuned GPT-3.5 Turbo using our data from
Study 2A (see Figure 3b). In both cases we find improvements on some of the attributes that
were included in our fine-tuning data. Relative to baseline GPT , WTP for fluoride decreases to
a similar level as humans after fine-tuning. Notably , fine-tuning GPT using Study 1A increases
the accuracy of GPT’s WTP for cinnamon and strawberry flavors relative to both of our study
samples in Studies 1A and 1B. This finding is particularly encouraging, as it suggests that
providing GPT results from a survey on one sample of humans helped to predict a second
sample’s responses to similar questions. Similarly , the sign of preferences for Macbooks flips in
Study 2B after fine-tuning, and our estimated WTP for storage improves as well.
On the other hand, we find some cases where fine-tuning had less impact on GPT’s WTP . The
best example of this is laptop size, which baseline GPT-3.5 Turbo (as well as other LLMs), unlike
humans, identify as a negative. Fine-tuning GPT with human responses from Study 2A does
not improve alignment.
To address our second question, we study GPT’s ability to extrapolate from data we use to fine-
tune it. First, we study extrapolation to a separate but related product category . In Study 2C,
we fine-tune GPT with survey data about laptops but query it about tablets (see Figure 3c). We
find that fine-tuning increases the distance between human- and GPT-generated WTP estimates
29

===PAGE BREAK===

for brand, storage, and RAM. Fine-tuning reduces the absolute difference in WTP for size, but
flips the sign of this preference relative to humans. Yielding the incorrect sign of WTP may well
be more detrimental than overestimating WTP . Overall, we do not find supportive evidence of
GPT’s ability to extrapolate to other product categories after fine-tuning (even when they have
the same attributes). We propose two reasons why GPT is not better aligned with humans in
this case: i) Attribute values for tablets are the same or lower than the worst levels for laptops
(e.g., 16 GB of RAM is the largest available for tablets but the lowest for laptops), which may
impact GPT’s ability to learn about these levels; ii) even before fine-tuning, GPT’s estimates for
tablets were the most divergent from human samples.
We find more encouraging results when we turn our attention to extrapolation within cate-
gory. We withheld information on three attributes from GPT during fine-tuning: cucumber
and pancake flavors for toothpaste, and a built-in projector for laptops. Turning to Study 1B
first, fine-tuning GPT with data from Study 1A flips the signs of WTP for both of our new flavors
from positive to negative, matching the sign from our human sample. Our post-fine-tuning esti-
mates of WTP for the cucumber flavor are within 30% of our estimates from humans, although
they are still outside of the corresponding CI. Our WTP estimates for cinnamon-flavored tooth-
paste are within the CI for the estimate from humans in Study 1A, and fine-tuning Study 1B
with Study 1A also brings GPT’s WTP for cinnamon within the CI in 1B. Our WTP estimates
for pancake-flavored toothpaste (relative to mint) are less similar: we derive a WTP of -$2.40,
whereas our human sample indicates a WTP of approximately -$7.00. Still, in this case a fine-
tuned GPT would help a market researcher correctly assess that both new flavors are unlikely
to be popular with the target population, owing to the dramatically reduced distance between
GPT’s and humans’ WTP estimates.
We see another example of successful extrapolation within category when we look at Study
2B, our survey concerning laptops with a new projector feature, which we fine-tuned with
our data from Study 2A (laptops without projectors). In the baseline version of this study , GPT
30

===PAGE BREAK===

overestimated customers’ WTP for a projector by more than a factor of three. After fine-tuning,
the two estimates align very closely . In this study , then, fine-tuning was essential to developing
reasonable estimates, and it produced not only the correct sign but also the correct magnitude
of WTP for the target audience. We close by noting that we replicated our study on GPT-4o,
without fine-tuning, and this exercise produced a WTP very similar to our humans and to our
fine-tuned GPT . Although this is only one example, this supports our hypothesis that fine-tuning
may help to reduce some of the heterogeneity in estimates across LLMs.
Finally , we also examine whether fine-tuning may be able to improve our customer hetero-
geneity results. To do this, we again fine-tune GPT with Study 2A responses, but we modified
the prompt to include the income bracket and gender of the customer based on our survey
responses. We then query this fine-tuned GPT with our questions from Study 2B where we
separately ask about customers from different income levels, genders, and political affiliations.
Overall, we find that fine-tuning GPT with demographic information generated WTP estimates
that are more similar to the average estimates from the human studies, and also correctly
changed the sign of preferences for Macbooks (relative to customers with $50-75k in income)
across the income distribution.
However, GPT was unable to meaningfully recover the differences across the different demo-
graphic groups, both for attributes that existed in Study 2A and for the new attribute, even
when those differences were statistically significant (e.g., lowest and highest income brackets,
gender, and political differences in Figure 6a). For example, the mean WTP for Macbook among
human males was -$50 and for females it was $249, but the fine-tuned model suggests WTPs of
$45 and $57, respectively . For the projector, the fine-tuned model suggests a WTP of between
$170 and $196, which is outside of the CI for the majority of the human sub-samples. Fig-
ure 6 presents the results for WTP for Macbook and projector, and Web Appendix G.2 includes
additional details about the procedure and presents the WTP estimates for all the different
attributes. Given these results, a marketer interested in using our method to study the WTP of
31

===PAGE BREAK===

particular customer segments may have to train a separate model for each customer segment
they are interested in (using sufficient past surveys on that population).
Figure 6: Study 2B WTP by Demographic Groups
(a) Macbook Preference (over Surface)
(b) Built-In Projector
Notes: Estimated WTP heterogeneity for Macbooks, relative to Surface, and for projectors in laptops, estimated
separately for gender, income, and political affiliation. Brackets indicate the 95% confidence interval on the
estimated WTP from our human sample. GPT represents WTP estimates based on GPT-3.5 Turbo responses. GPT-
FT represents a fine-tuned GPT-3.5 Turbo model.
3.4 Potential for Scalability of Our Fine-Tuning Approach
The results above leave open the question of how this approach would scale in practice. We
have only fine-tuned GPT with a single study at a time, whereas market research firms could
have dozens of studies relevant to a class of products. We intuit that certain relationships in a
dataset should be fundamentally easier for an LLM, or any machine learning model, to “learn"
than others. In small samples especially , LLMs may more easily learn simple moments such
as market shares rather than estimate WTP , which is a complex and highly model-dependent
function of the data.
32

===PAGE BREAK===

Fine-tuning GPT on our target customer base merely modifies the model’s weights to better
fit the data we have provided. GPT then uses its other implicit knowledge to respond to our
survey prompts and extrapolate from our data. Intuitively speaking, if we can show that our
single studies are enough to more closely match certain moments between GPT- and human-
generated responses, we should expect that, consistent with typical scaling rules for model
training, larger amounts of fine-tuning data should help GPT learn more complex relationships
in the data.
In Figure 7 we plot two sets of model-free outcomes to demonstrate intuitively that GPT learns
these relationships in the data. In Figure 7a, we plot outside option shares from humans and
GPT in each of our studies, including before and after fine-tuning where relevant. Here we can
see that in each of the three studies in which we fine-tuned GPT , fine-tuning makes GPT choose
the no-purchase option at rates more like our human participants. This is true even in Studies
1B and 2B, where the choice set in the new study differs from the fine-tuning data (because
they include new features), indicating some level of successful extrapolation. In Figure 7b, we
restrict our GPT-generated data from Study 2B to only the exact set of questions which were
used to fine-tune GPT (i.e., those which were included in the Sawtooth human survey version
of Study 2A), and compare the similarity of choice shares between GPT and humans before and
after fine-tuning. Again, we see that fine-tuning generated intuitive improvements in accuracy
on these empirical moments relative to our human benchmark. These comparisons suggest
that our approach may be expanded by research firms over time.
4 Conclusion
This paper studies the usefulness of GPT and other LLMs for market researchers. We focus
on the practical problem of a market researcher who would like to learn something about
customer preferences in a new setting but may not have the time or budget to run new studies
with human subjects. With this setting in mind, we designed a custom set of studies that allow
33

===PAGE BREAK===

Figure 7: Results from Fine-tuning
(a) Outside Option Shares
 (b) Study 2B Market Shares
Notes: This figure presents selected moments of our data in which we can see fine-tuning improve GPT’s ability
to replicate human choices. Figure (a) presents the outside (no purchase) option for each study , comparing GPT-
3.5 Turbo before and after fine-tuning to the closest human comparison group. Figure (b) presents the absolute
difference in choice shares between GPT and humans (in percentage points), among the specific tasks which were
provided to GPT via fine-tuning. GPT represents the GPT-3.5 Turbo model, and GPT-FT represents a fine-tuned
GPT-3.5 Turbo model.
us to mimic the market researcher’s existing data resources and to control the amount and type
of information GPT has about the context under study . We then compare GPT’s responses to
survey questions with those of humans’.
Our results are encouraging in some respects but carry important caveats that must be un-
derstood before the approach is applied in practice. In our pilot study , GPT’s implied WTP for
certain consumer goods came within 50% of estimates from a recently published conjoint study ,
and in our main studies, GPT correctly signs and orders WTP for several product attributes.
These results suggest that LLMs encode some information relevant to consumer preferences.
At the same time, baseline GPT estimates are frequently unreliable: we document WTP over-
estimates of two- to threefold, wrong signs on brand preferences and screen size in the laptop
studies, wrong signs on new toothpaste flavors, and substantial variation across LLM versions.
In all of these cases, a researcher without a human benchmark would not have been able to
identify the failures in advance.
The most practically useful finding is that fine-tuning GPT with human survey data from the
same product category and population substantially improves alignment, including for product
34

===PAGE BREAK===

features not present in the fine-tuning data. A market researcher who already has survey data
on a set of product features may be able to use our fine-tuning approach to generate prelim-
inary WTP estimates for a new product feature before investing in a full new human study .
Within this scope, the approach offers meaningful practical advantages: whereas a survey of
real customers may cost many thousands of dollars and take weeks or months to implement,
each of our studies ran in a matter of hours at substantially lower cost. The results do not sup-
port a broader claim that LLMs can substitute for human surveys in new product categories,
nor that they reliably reflect the preferences of specific demographic segments. Fine-tuning in
a cross-category setting (laptop data applied to tablets) not only failed to improve alignment,
but also worsened GPT’s performance. And while fine-tuning improved GPT’s alignment with
average human WTP estimates across demographic groups, it was unable to generate compa-
rable heterogeneity . The fine-tuned model better approximated the population mean but still
failed to recover meaningful differences between groups such as income, gender, and political
affiliation.
These limitations suggest a natural workflow. Researchers should conduct human studies first
and use LLMs with fine-tuning to extrapolate to adjacent features or prompt conditions, rather
than using LLMs as a standalone substitute. LLMs may help narrow down feature ideas worth
testing with humans, but the fine-tuning results make clear that the value of this approach
is conditional on having human data from a similar context in hand. Without such data, the
baseline results are too noisy and inconsistently signed to be acted upon directly .
Our work surfaces some additional limitations. Much work needs to be done to evaluate which
market research objectives LLMs are best suited to, and for which ones they are a poor substi-
tute for existing methods. We have identified a few areas in which GPT appears to fall short
of capturing preferences, such as its minimal ability to reflect customer heterogeneity . We ex-
pect that there are at least a few more. For instance, because GPT is “pre-trained,” without
additional fresh human survey data provided by the researcher or access to the internet, it may
35

===PAGE BREAK===

reveal static preferences (although our methodology can mitigate this issue by augmenting the
LLM with human studies). Additionally , our work emphasizes the sensitivity of preference esti-
mates from GPT to the wording of prompts (see Web Appendix A for examples we came across,
although our results were overall robust to prompt phrasing). Furthermore, rapid development
cycles and frequent introduction of new LLMs necessitate evaluating baseline responses of each
LLM release. We already see in multiple examples (see Figure 3) that different LLM often pro-
vide different estimates, which means researchers cannot take a set of results from one LLM
and assume they generalize to another.
We expect that LLMs will become more useful for market research in the future, parallel to the
rapid improvement in the sophistication of these models. As LLMs grow in scale and improve
in accuracy , their ability to absorb and infer rich aspects of consumer behavior may likewise
increase. Our fine-tuning results already suggest one concrete path: combining LLMs with his-
torical human survey data produces estimates that are more aligned with future human stud-
ies. This insight appears to extend beyond our setting. Lee (2025) shows, in a complementary
framework, that fine-tuning an LLM on structural demand estimates derived from purchase
data enables informative predictions of consumer preferences for entirely new brands. Fu-
ture work might explore how the size of the fine-tuning dataset, the choice of LLM, and the
degree of category overlap between training and target populations affect the quality of the
resulting estimates. While we appeal to established market research paradigms to illustrate the
approach, the combination of survey methods and LLMs may give rise to new market research
paradigms18
18For example, emerging work on digital twins examined the ability to better mimic human responses by gen-
erating individual simulations of humans unbounded by the limits of human subjects research.(e.g., Park et al.,
2024; Peng et al., 2025; Toubia et al., 2025). A complementary line of work develops methods to augment human
survey data with LLM-generated responses (e.g., Brynjolfsson et al., 2026; Leng et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2026).
36

===PAGE BREAK===

References
Acerbi, A., & Stubbersfield, J. M. (2023). Large language models show human-like content bi-
ases in transmission chain experiments.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
120(44), e2313790120.
Aher, G., Arriaga, R. I., & Kalai, A. T . (2022). Using large language models to simulate multiple
humans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.10264.
Argyle, L. P ., Busby, E. C., Fulda, N., Gubler, J. R., Rytting, C., & Wingate, D. (2023). Out of
one, many: Using language models to simulate human samples.Political Analysis, 1–15.
Arora, N., Chakraborty, I., & Nishimura, Y. (2024). AI-Human hybrids for marketing research:
Leveraging llms as collaborators. Journal of Marketing, 00222429241276529.
Atari, M., Xue, M. J., Park, P . S., Blasi, D., & Henrich, J. (2024). Which humans? PsyArXiv
preprint 5b26t.
Bisbee, J., Clinton, J. D., Dorff, C., Kenkel, B., & Larson, J. M. (2024). Synthetic replacements
for human survey data? the perils of large language models. Political Analysis, 1–16.
Brazell, J. D., Diener, C. G., Karniouchina, E., Moore, W . L., Séverin, V ., & Uldry, P .-F . (2006).
The no-choice option and dual response choice designs. Marketing Letters, 17(4), 255–
268.
Brynjolfsson, E., Enrıquez, J. R., Kazinnik, S., & Nguyen, D. (2026). Augmenting survey data
with generative ai: An application to economic research. Available at SSRN 6343598.
Burnap, A., Hauser, J. R., & Timoshenko, A. (2023). Product aesthetic design: A machine learn-
ing augmentation. Marketing Science, 42(6), 1029–1056.
Chen, Y., Liu, T . X., Shan, Y., & Zhong, S. (2023). The emergence of economic rationality of
gpt. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(51), e2316205120.
Costello, T . H., Pennycook, G., & Rand, D. G. (2024). Durably reducing conspiracy beliefs
through dialogues with ai. Science, 385(6714), eadq1814.
Dentella, V ., Günther, F ., & Leivada, E. (2023). Systematic testing of three language models
reveals low language accuracy , absence of response stability , and a yes-response bias.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(51), e2309583120.
Dominguez-Olmedo, R., Hardt, M., & Mendler-Dünner, C. (2023). Questioning the survey re-
sponses of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07951.
Fong, J., Guo, T ., & Rao, A. (2023). Debunking misinformation about consumer products: Ef-
fects on beliefs and purchase behavior. Journal of Marketing Research.
Goli, A., & Singh, A. (2024). Frontiers: Can large language models capture human preferences?
Marketing Science.
37

===PAGE BREAK===

Green, P . E., & Srinivasan, V . (1978). Conjoint Analysis in Consumer Research: Issues and Out-
look. Journal of Consumer Research, 5(2), 103–123.
Green, P . E., & Srinivasan, V . (1990). Conjoint analysis in marketing: New developments with
implications for research and practice. Journal of Marketing, 54(4), 3–19.
Gui, G., & Toubia, O. (2025). The challenge of using llms to simulate human behavior: A causal
inference perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15524.
Hackenburg, K., & Margetts, H. (2024). Evaluating the persuasive influence of political micro-
targeting with large language models. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
121(24), e2403116121.
Horton, J. J. (2023). Large language models as simulated economic agents: What can we learn
from homo silicus? arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.07543.
Johnston, R. J., Boyle, K. J., Adamowicz, W ., Bennett, J., Brouwer, R., Cameron, T . A., Hane-
mann, W . M., Hanley , N., Ryan, M., Scarpa, R., et al. (2017). Contemporary guidance
for stated preference studies. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
Economists, 4(2), 319–405.
Kroes, E. P ., & Sheldon, R. J. (1988). Stated preference methods: An introduction. Journal of
Transport Economics and Policy, 11–25.
Lee, K. (2025). Generative brand choice [Working paper, University of Chicago Booth School of
Business].
Lehr, S. A., Caliskan, A., Liyanage, S., & Banaji, M. R. (2024). Chatgpt as research scientist:
Probing gpt’s capabilities as a research librarian, research ethicist, data generator, and
data predictor. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(35), e2404328121.
Leng, Y., Sang, Y., & Agarwal, A. (2026). Reducing disparity between llms and humans: Optimal
llm sample calibration. Available at SSRN 4802019.
Lewis, P ., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F ., Karpukhin, V ., Goyal, N., Küttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih,
W .-t., Rocktäschel, T ., et al. (2020). Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-
intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 9459–9474.
Li, P ., Castelo, N., Katona, Z., & Sarvary, M. (2024). Frontiers: Determining the validity of large
language models for automated perceptual analysis.Marketing Science, 43(2), 254–266.
Netzer, O., Feldman, R., Goldenberg, J., & Fresko, M. (2012). Mine your own business: Market-
structure surveillance through text mining. Marketing Science, 31(3), 521–543.
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P ., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S.,
Slama, K., Ray, A., et al. (2022). Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35, 27730–27744.
38

===PAGE BREAK===

Park, J. S., Zou, C. Q., Shaw, A., Hill, B. M., Cai, C., Morris, M. R., Willer, R., Liang, P ., &
Bernstein, M. S. (2024). Generative agent simulations of 1,000 people. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.10109.
Peng, T ., Gui, G., Merlau, D. J., Fan, G. J., Sliman, M. B., Brucks, M., Johnson, E. J., Morwitz, V .,
Althenayyan, A., Bellezza, S., Donati, D., Fong, H., Friedman, E., Guevara, A., Hussein,
M., Jerath, K., Kogut, B., Lane, K., Li, H., . . . Toubia, O. (2025). A mega-study of digital
twins reveals strengths, weaknesses and opportunities for further improvement. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2509.19088.
Timoshenko, A., & Hauser, J. R. (2019). Identifying customer needs from user-generated con-
tent. Marketing Science, 38(1), 1–20.
Timoshenko, A., Mao, C., & Hauser, J. R. (2025). Can large language models extract customer
needs as well as professional analysts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01870.
Toubia, O., Gui, G. Z., Peng, T ., Merlau, D. J., Li, A., & Chen, H. (2025). Database report: Twin-
2k-500: A data set for building digital twins of over 2,000 people based on their answers
to over 500 questions. Marketing Science.
Wang, M., Zhang, D. J., & Zhang, H. (2026). Large language models for market research: A
data-augmentation approach. Marketing Science.
39

===PAGE BREAK===

Appendix
A Code Example
The following Python code was used to collect GPT responses for Study 2A:
1 # Import pa ck age s ( install first if needed )
2 from openai import OpenAI
3 import i t e r t o o l s
4 import pandas as pd
5 import time
6 import os
7 from dotenv import load _ dotenv
8 from c o n c u r r e n t . futures import T h r e a d P o o l E x e c u t o r , as _ c o m p l e t e d
9 load _ dotenv ()
10
11 # Include API Key p ro vid ed by OpenAI ( www . p la tf or m . openai . com )
12 api _ key = os . getenv ( ’ api _ key ’)
13 client = OpenAI (
14 api _ key = api _ key
15 )
16
17 # F u n c t i o n s for i n t e r a c t i n g with OpenAI API ( prompting , e x t r a c t i n g responses , etc .)
18 def request _ with _ retry ( model , prompt , max _ retries =5 , base _ delay =1) :
19 for attempt in range ( max _ retries ) :
20 try :
21 re sp on se = client . chat . c o m p l e t i o n s . create (
22 model = model ,
23 me ss ag es = [
24 {
25 " role " : " system " ,
26 " content " : " You are a c ust om er . You are se le ct ed at random while sho pp in g for laptops to
p a r t i c i p a t e in a survey . The i n t e r v i e w e r will d es cri be the options you saw while
sh op pi ng and ask you to report which option you chose to p ur cha se . Wh en eve r two
options are shown , you can also choose a third option which is not to p ur ch ase
an yt hi ng that day . "
27 } ,
28 {
29 " role " : " user " ,
30 " content " : prompt
31 }
32 ] ,
33 t e m p e r a t u r e = 1 ,
34 max _ tokens = 256 ,
35 top _ p = 1 ,
36 f r e q u e n c y _ penalty = 0 ,
37 pr es en ce _ penalty = 0
38 )
39 return r es pon se
40 except E x c e p t i o n as e :
41 if attempt == max _ retries - 1:
42 raise
43 else :
44 sleep _ d ur at io n = base _ delay * (2 * * attempt )
45 print ( f " Error : { e }. R etr yi ng in { sleep _ du ra ti on } seconds . " )
46 time . sleep ( sleep _ du rat io n )
47
48 def ge ne ra te _ prompt ( product _ 1 , product _ 2) :
49 prompts = [
50 f " { product _ 1[0]} , Price : $ { product _ 1[2]} , RAM : { product _ 1[3]} GB , Storage : { product _ 1[4]} GB , Size : { product
_ 1[1]} in " ,
51 f " { product _ 2[0]} , Price : $ { product _ 2[2]} , RAM : { product _ 2[3]} GB , Storage : { product _ 2[4]} GB , Size : { product
_ 2[1]} in "
52 ]
53 return f " While shopping , you see two options :\ n \ n1 . { prompts [0]}\ n \ n2 . { prompts [1]}\ n \ nYou also have the
option not to p ur cha se a laptop .\ n \ nDid you p ur ch as e either of the a v a i l a b l e laptops ? If so , which one ? "
54
55 def process _ set ( model , index , set , i t e r a t i o n s ) :
56 r e s p o n s e s = []
57 product _ 1 = set [0]
58 product _ 2 = set [1]
59 prompt = ge ne rat e _ prompt ( product _ 1 , product _ 2)
60 r esp on se = request _ with _ retry ( model , prompt )
61 answers = {
62 ’ set ’: index + 1 ,
63 ’ first _ product ’: product _ 1 ,
64 ’ second _ product ’: product _ 2 ,
65 ’ prompt ’: prompt ,
66 ’ re sp ons e ’: re spo ns e . choices [0]. message . content . strip ()
67 }
68 r e s p o n s e s . append ( answers )
69 return r e s p o n s e s
70
71 def query _ gpt ( model , iterations , brands , size , prices , ram , storage ) :
72 p rod uc ts = list ( i t e r t o o l s . product ( brands , size , prices , ram , storage ) )
73 sets = [ list (( p1 , p2 ) ) for p1 in p ro du cts for p2 in p ro du ct s if p1 ! = p2 ]
74 r e s p o n s e s = []
75 for index , set in e n u m e r a t e ( sets ) :
76 re sp on se _ data = process _ set ( model , index , set , i t e r a t i o n s )
77 r e s p o n s e s . extend ( re sp on se _ data )
78 sorted _ r e s p o n s e s = sorted ( responses , key = lambda x : x [ ’ set ’ ])
79 return sorted _ r e s p o n s e s
80
81 # Running Study 2 A with GPT 3.5 - Turbo
82 if _ _ name _ _ == ’_ _ main _ _ ’:
83 model = ’ gpt -3.5 - turbo -0125 ’
84 i t e r a t i o n s = 150
85 brands = [ ’ M i c r o s o f t Surface Laptop ’ , ’ Apple MacBook Air ’]
86 prices = [1000 , 1200 , 1400]
87 size = [13 , 15]
88 ram = [8 , 16 , 32]
89 storage = [256 , 512 , 1000]
40

===PAGE BREAK===

90
91 output = query _ gpt (
92 model = model ,
93 i t e r a t i o n s = iterations ,
94 brands = brands ,
95 prices = prices ,
96 size = size ,
97 ram = ram ,
98 storage = storage
99 )
100 df = pd . D a t a F r a m e ( output )
101 df . to _ csv ( ’ output / Study1 _ output . csv ’ , index = False )
B Prompt Example
A prompt that was used to create GPT responses for one consideration set in Study 2A:
“System message:
You are a customer. You are selected at random while shopping for laptops to
participate in a survey . The interviewer will describe the options you saw while
shopping and ask you to report which option you chose to purchase. Whenever
two options are shown, you can also choose a third option which is not to purchase
anything that day .
User message:
While shopping, you see two options:
1. Microsoft Surface Laptop, Price: $1400, RAM: 8GB, Storage: 256GB, Size: 13in
2. Apple MacBook Air, Price: $1000, RAM: 8GB, Storage: 1000GB, Size: 15in
You also have the option not to purchase a laptop.
Did you purchase either of the available laptops? If so, which one?”
41

===PAGE BREAK===

Web Appendix
A Guidelines and Limitations in Querying GPT
Designing and running the studies in this paper has allowed us to identify some simple guide-
lines that improve the quality of the responses given by GPT , as well as important cases in
which GPT exhibits particular sensitivity or unreliability . Like most applications of GPT , we
have found prompting to be important for retrieving a useful response from GPT . We offer the
examples we came across below, while recognizing that these are a small representation of a
full set of guidelines for using GPT in market research.
Sensitivity to Response Order. When offered multiple options, GPT is significantly more
likely to choose the option that is listed first. For all of our results that include two options, we
randomize the order of these options, and run the surveys with one option appearing first for
half of our sample.
Inducing Choosing the Outside Option. The fraction of GPT survey responses in which the
GPT customer chooses one of the available options (rather than choosing not to purchase)
depends on the precise phrasing of the prompt. Consider the following two potential phrases
to include in the prompt after describing the available choices:
• “They also have the option not to purchase a laptop. The customer is asked, after they
finish shopping: Which laptop, if any , did you purchase?”
• “They also have the option not to purchase a laptop. The customer is asked, after they
finish shopping: Did you purchase a laptop? If so, which one?”
Although their meaning is quite similar, in practice we find that the first phrase yields only
a handful of responses in which the outside option is chosen, while the second phrase larger
outside option shares. Importantly , conditional on making a choice, the implied marked shares
are similar between the two types of phrases. These differences in prompting were especially
crucial for conjoint studies. For these studies, we used the language “Did you purchase... If so,
which one?”
Specificity in requested output. We found GPT to be verbose in its responses to our early
prompts. For example, if we ask a question aimed at eliciting willingness to pay , (e.g., “What
is the maximum price you would be willing to pay for X?”) we were likely to receive an essay-
W-1

===PAGE BREAK===

like response, which includes the reasoning for the answer, or a range of prices. Alternatively ,
requesting a single price as an answer was more likely to produce a single price and a more
concise response overall. GPT responses are sensitive as well to the exact framing of such
a prompt. For example, when the prompt included “Please answer by giving an amount in
dollars” GPT only provided round dollar amounts, whereas specifying “amount in dollars and
cents” led to the expected output.
W-2

===PAGE BREAK===

B Recovering Realistic WTP For Products
We explore whether asking GPT directly for WTP for certain products provides a realistic distri-
bution of prices, both for categories which are commonly sold via the internet (laptops, tooth-
paste) and others which are not (beverages at a restaurant). We follow our typical prompts,
where a customer is randomly selected while shopping for a product and describe a good, but
we omit the price of the good. We also adjust the prompting questions and ask: “The custoemr
is asked: What is the maximum price you would be willing to pay for [the good]? please give a
single price as you answer.”W1 Figure W1 reports our results. We begin by plotting the distribu-
tion of WTP for a Surface Laptop 3 with the specifications: Intel Core i5 processor, 8GB RAM,
13.5in screen, and 128GB Storage Drive. The median implied WTP for the Surface Laptop 3 is
$1,000, similar to its market price.
Next, we use general descriptions to elicit WTP for a good, rather than WTP for a particular
brand. In Figure W1b we solicit WTP for a “whitening toothpaste.” We then ask for the WTP
for a glass of soda (Figure W1c) and a glass of wine (Figure W1e) at a restaurant, and find
that the median WTP for wine is six times higher than for soda (median of $15.00 compared to
$2.50). Finally , we also demonstrate that the WTP for these items depends on the size and the
context, as the WTP for soda can at a supermarket is lower than at a restaurant (Figure W1d)
and the WTP for a bottle of wine is higher than for a glass of wine (Figure W1f).
W1In WTP queries, we query GPT 1,000 times for each product.
W-3

===PAGE BREAK===

Figure W1: Willingness to Pay for Products
(a) Surface Laptop 3
 (b) Whitening Toothpaste
(c) “Glass of soda (at restaurant)"
 (d) “Can of soda (at supermarket)"
(e) “Glass of wine (at restaurant)"
 (f) “Bottle of wine (at restaurant)"
W-4

===PAGE BREAK===

C Alternative Product Attributes WTP Solicitation Approaches
In addition to the conjoint approach used in the main text, we also tested two different strate-
gies for eliciting WTP: a direct solicitation approach, and an alternative indirect elicitation ap-
proach. We note that direct solicitation of WTP for product attributes is not the typical method
for human-based market research, as humans’ ability to quantify these measures is limited. In-
stead, conjoint analysis is often used to derive WTP from survey responses. However, GPT may
be more sophisticated than humans and may be able to calculate or infer WTP for attributes
from other training data. Therefore, we test the its ability to provide WTP for attributes directly
or in a relatively simple indirect method before moving on to a conjoint study . We report the
exact prompts we used for these studies in Web Appendix E.1.
Direct solicitation For the direct solicitation approach, we offer two identical goods that
differ only on the existence of the attribute of interest. For toothpaste (deodorant), we offer
Colgate whitening toothpaste (Dove scented deodorant) and ask GPT how much more it would
be willing to pay for the option with fluoride (without aluminum) over the option without
fluoride (with aluminum).W2 Figures W2a and W2b report the results. The median and average
WTP is $1.00 and $1.20 for fluoride and $1.00 and $1.30 for “no aluminum.”
Figure W2: Willingness to Pay for Attributes – Direct Solicitation
(a) Fluoride in toothpaste
 (b) No aluminum in deodorant
Indirect elicitation The indirect elicitation approach consists of two steps. First, we use GPT
to estimate the demand for the good with and without the attribute by asking GPT to make
a choice between two toothpaste to generate two demand curves. Then, we compare these
curves to derive WTP for the attribute.
W2In WTP queries, we query GPT 1,000 times for each product.
W-5

===PAGE BREAK===

For toothpaste, we first estimate the demand for Colgate whitening toothpaste without fluoride
to generate a demand curve (the focal good does not contain fluoride, but the reference good
priced at $4.00 does). Then, we compare the demand curve for the toothpaste with fluoride
with the demand curve for the toothpaste without fluoride (see Figure W3a for the resulting
demand curves) to derive WTP for fluoride. At each price p on the “without fluoride” demand
curve, we calculate the price p′ such that demand for toothpaste with fluoride at p′ is equal to
the demand for flouride-less toothpaste at p. Our WTP measure is then p′− p, which amounts
to taking horizontal differences between the demand curves in Figure W3a. For example, when
the price of Colgate without fluoride is p = $3.00, the shares are 9%, which corresponds to
the Colgate with fluoride shares at a price ofp′ = $4.19, implying a WTP for fluoride of $1.19.
We note that this is comparable to the median WTP of $1.00 generated by the direct elicitation
approach in Figure W2a.
We follow the same approach for deodorant (using the Speed Stick brand with a price of $4.25
as a reference price, based on Fong et al. (2023)), which generates the curves in Figure W3b.
As can be seen in the figure, GPT prefers aluminum-free deodorant. The implied WTP for
aluminum is -$1.26 when deodorant is priced at $3.00.
Also implied by these figures are GPT’s brand preferences. In Figure W3a, GPT has a preference
of Crest over Colgate: when both brands have fluoride, the shares for Colgate are below 100%
even when Colgate is significantly cheaper than Crest, and at price parity the shares of Colgate
are lower than those of Crest. Similarly , Figure W3b reflects that GPT prefers Dove over Speed
Stick. These preferences are consistent with those at Fong et al. (2023), who report a slight
preference for Crest (the reported market shares are 34.7% for Crest versus 33% for Colgate)
and a significant preference for Dove (the reported shares are 46% for Dove versus 22% for
Speed Stick).
W-6

===PAGE BREAK===

Figure W3: Willingness to Pay for Attributes – Indirect Elicitation
(a) Toothpaste, Demand curve
 (b) Deodorant, Demand curve
W-7

===PAGE BREAK===

D Human Survey Materials
D.1 Surveys
All the human surveys were carried using the Sawtooth Discover software, which balances
attributes across choices and selects the attributes to be nearly orthogonal all all configurations.
In each of the studies, participants had 12 choice tasks where 2 product configurations were
presented. All of the studies had a similar preamble that said:“Imagine that you are a customer
shopping for [product]. In the next few screens, you will be presented with different [product]
options and will have to indicate your preference among the [products]. Once you select your
preferred option, you will be asked to answer if you would purchase that[product] at this time or
leave the store empty-handed. You will be presented with 12 different choice tasks.” After each
choice tasks, participants were asked to answer a question: “Would you purchase the [product]
you selected or choose not to purchase any[product]?” Figure W4 shows a sample choice question
from Study 2A. While we allowed participants to first specify a choice, and only then decide if
to purchase or not, our WTP analyses was based only on the choices conditional on purchase,
similar to the GPT studies.
Figure W4: Study 2A
For Study 1B and Study 2B, we added an additional sentence to describe the new features after
the first sentence. In Study 1B, we added: “Some toothpastes have new flavors: pancake and
W-8

===PAGE BREAK===

cucumber.” In Study 2B we added the details:“Some laptops have a new feature: a built-in LCD
Projector. The built-in projector does not impact the shape /form and weight of the laptop or the
battery life.”
At the end of each survey , after participants completed the 12 choice tasks, we also collect
demographics. Specifically , we collect typical survey demographic levels (options specified in
parentheses): gender (male /female/non-binary/other:please specify), age, race and ethnic-
ity (American Indian or Alaskan native /Asian, not including South Asian /South Asian/Black
or African American /Hispanic, Latino, or of Spanish descent /Native Hawaiian or Pacific Is-
lander/White/other:please specify), political affiliation (Republican /Democrat/Independen-
t/No preference/other:please specify), household income (Under $10,000/$10,000–$24,999/
$25,000–$49,999,/$50,000–$74,999/$75,000–$99,999/$100,000–$150,000/over $150,000),
and education level (Some High School or less /High School/Some college - not currently en-
rolled/Some college - currently enrolled /2 year Associate Degree/4-year Bachelor’s Degree/-
Master’s Degree/Advanced Professional Degree(MD/JD) or Doctoral Degree (PhD)).
D.2 Human Sample Characteristics
Table W1 reports demographics information for our human samples for our studies compared
to recent US population studies.
Table W1: Demographics compared to US population
Participants US population
Prop. Women 0.54 0.51
Median Age 35 38.9
Median Income $50,000-$74,999 $75,149
Prop. HS Degree or higher 0.99 0.89
Prop. White 0.69 0.75
Prop. Black 0.1 0.14
Prop. Democrat 0.44 0.25
Prop. Republican 0.18 0.27
Notes: N = 1, 504 participants across 5 studies. US demographic
information is from the 2020 US Census Bureau data. https://www.
census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/US, accessed July 2024. US politi-
cal affiliation is from Gallup, https://news.gallup.com/poll/15370/
party-affiliation.aspx, accessed July 2024. Because we collected in-
come brackets we are unable to calculate the median income but the
median bracket is lower than the median income in the population.
W-9

===PAGE BREAK===

E Prompts and Study Details
Below we provide the complete sets of prompts for our analyses and other study details. As
mentioned in Web Appendix A, whenever we presented two options in a prompt, we ensured
to randomize the order of the option. In the interest of clarity and space, we only detail one
of those options below. Note that in GPT models 3.5-Turbo and higher for text completion,
GPT expects a system message and a user message. The system message is a message from a
developer to the GPT , explaining to it the expected behavior of the GPT in this context. The
user message provides requests or comments for the GPT assistant to respond to. We run each
prompt as an independent query from any other prompt, and set temperature at 1.0 for all of
our queries.
Prompts for our conjoint studies use variables that represent the different attribute levels, for
example, in Study 2A the variables: LaptopBrand 1,Price 1, RAM1, Storage 1, and Size 1 cor-
respond to the brand, price, RAM, Storage, and size for the first configuration in a consideration
set.
E.1 Prompts for Pilot Studies (using the text-davinci-003 model)
E.1.1 For the conjoint studies (fluoride and toothpaste case)
“A customer is randomly selected while shopping in the supermarket. Their annual
income is $income .
While shopping, the customer passes by the toothpaste aisle and sees two options:
• Colgate whitening toothpaste col gateFluoride fluoride, price $col gatePrice .
• Crest whitening toothpaste crestFluoride fluoride, price $crestPrice .
They also have the option not to purchase toothpaste. The customer is asked, after
they finish shopping: Did you purchase any toothpaste? If so, which one?
Customer: ”
E.1.2 For direct solicitation (fluoride and toothpaste case)
“A customer is part of a survey meant to elicit their willingness to pay for different
attributes of goods. Their annual income is $income .
W-10

===PAGE BREAK===

The customer is asked to consider two options:
• Option 1: Colgate toothpaste, without fluoride, whitening
• Option 2: Colgate toothpaste, with fluoride, whitening
The customer is then asked: ‘how much more would you be willing to pay for
Option 2 than for Option 1?’ Please answer by giving an amount in dollars and
cents.
Customer: $”
E.1.3 For implied demand curve calculation (fluoride and toothpaste case)
“A customer is randomly selected while shopping in the supermarket. Their annual
income is $income .
While shopping, the customer passes by the toothpaste aisle and sees two options:
• Colgate whitening toothpaste with /without fluoride, price $col gatePrice .
• Crest whitening toothpaste with fluoride, price $4.
They also have the option not to purchase toothpaste. The customer is asked, after
they finish shopping: Which toothpaste, if any , did you purchase?
Customer: ”
E.2 Prompts for Main Studies (using the gpt-3.5-turbo-0125 and gpt-4o-
2024-05-13 models)
E.2.1 Prompts for Study 1A
“System message:
You are a customer. You are selected at random while shopping for toothpaste to
participate in a survey . The interviewer will describe the options you saw while
shopping and ask you to report which option you chose to purchase. Whenever
two options are shown, you can also choose a third option which is not to purchase
anything that day .
W-11

===PAGE BREAK===

User message:
While shopping, you see two options:
1. ToothpasteBrand 1, Price: $Price 1, Has Fluoride: Flouride 1, Flavor: Flavor 1
2. ToothpasteBrand 2, Price: $Price 2, Has Fluoride: Flouride 2, Flavor: Flavor 2
You also have the option not to purchase toothpaste.
Did you purchase either of the available toothpaste options? If so, which one?”
E.2.2 Prompts for Study 1B
For this study , the prompts are the based on the prompts of Study 1A, changes are illustrated
in red.
“System message:
You are a customer. You are selected at random while shopping for toothpaste to
participate in a survey . Some toothpastes have new flavors: pancake and cucumber.
The interviewer will describe the options you saw while shopping and ask you to
report which option you chose to purchase. Whenever two options are shown, you
can also choose a third option which is not to purchase anything that day .
User message:
While shopping, you see two options:
1. ToothpasteBrand 1, Price: $Price 1, Has Fluoride: Flouride 1, Flavor: Flavor 1
2. ToothpasteBrand 2, Price: $Price 2, Has Fluoride: Flouride 2, Flavor: Flavor 2
You also have the option not to purchase toothpaste.
Did you purchase either of the available toothpaste options? If so, which one?”
E.2.3 Prompts for Study 2A
“System message:
You are a customer. You are selected at random while shopping for laptops to
participate in a survey . The interviewer will describe the options you saw while
W-12

===PAGE BREAK===

shopping and ask you to report which option you chose to purchase. Whenever
two options are shown, you can also choose a third option which is not to purchase
anything that day .
User message:
While shopping, you see two options:
1. LaptopBrand 1, Price: $Price 1, RAM: RAM1 GB, Storage: Storage 1 GB, Size:
Size 1 in
2. LaptopBrand 2, Price: $Price 2, RAM: RAM2 GB, Storage: Storage 2 GB, Size:
Size 2 in
You also have the option not to purchase a laptop.
Did you purchase either of the available laptops? If so, which one?”
E.2.4 Prompts for Study 2B
For this study , the prompts are the based on the prompts of Study 2A, changes are illustrated
in red.
“System message:
You are a customer. You are selected at random while shopping for laptops to
participate in a survey . Some laptops have a new feature: a built-in LCD projector.
The built-in projector does not impact the shape/form and weight of the laptop or
the battery life. The interviewer will describe the options you saw while shopping
and ask you to report which option you chose to purchase. Whenever two options
are shown, you can also choose a third option which is not to purchase anything
that day .
User message:
While shopping, you see two options:
1. LaptopBrand 1, Price: $Price 1, RAM: RAM1 GB, Storage: Storage 1 GB, Size:
Size 1 in, Built-in LCD Projector: Pro jector 1.
2. LaptopBrand 2, Price: $Price 2, RAM: RAM2 GB, Storage: Storage 2 GB, Size:
W-13

===PAGE BREAK===

Size 2 in, Built-in LCD Projector: Pro jector 2.
You also have the option not to purchase a laptop.
Did you purchase either of the available laptops? If so, which one?”
E.2.5 Prompts for Study 2C
“System message:
You are a customer. You are selected at random while shopping for tablets to partic-
ipate in a survey . The interviewer will describe the options you saw while shopping
and ask you to report which option you chose to purchase. Whenever two options
are shown, you can also choose a third option which is not to purchase anything
that day .
User message:
While shopping, you see two options:
1. TabletBrand 1, Price: $ Price 1, RAM: RAM1 GB, Storage: Storage 1 GB, Size:
Size 1 in
2. TabletBrand 2, Price: $ Price 2, RAM: RAM2 GB, Storage: Storage 2 GB, Size:
Size 2 in
You also have the option not to purchase a tablet.
Did you purchase either of the available tablets? If so, which one?”
E.2.6 Prompts Including Demographic Characteristics
In these prompts, we modify the descriptor in the system message “You are a customer” as
follows:
• Income: “You are a customer with an annual income of [less than $50,000 / $50,000–
$74,999/ $75,000–$150,000/ over $150,000]. You are selected...”
• Gender: “You are a [male/female] customer. You are selected...”
• Political Affiliation: “You are a customer who is a [Republican/Democrat]. You are se-
lected...”
W-14

===PAGE BREAK===

• Race and Ethnicity: “You are a [While/Black] customer. You are selected...”
• Education: “You are a customer [without a college degree /with a college degree ]. You
are selected...”
• Age: “You are a customer, aged [28 or younger/ 28–42/ 42 or older]. You are selected...”
E.3 Number of observations collected
In the pilot studies, we collected 300 responses for each consideration set. In Studies 1A, 1B,
2A, 2B, and 2C we collected 150 responses for each consideration set. After exploring the
consistency of these responses (see Web Appendix G), the rest of the studies were run with
50 responses for each consideration set, except for the heterogeneity studies on the fine-tuned
GPT that were run with 30 responses for each consideration set for each group.
E.4 Costs
While our approach significantly reduces the cost and time it takes to collect survey data, using
OpenAI fine-tuned models does become costly given current prices. Because we wanted to
thoroughly study GPT’s responses, we collected a large number of responses for each prompt,
our studies included complex designs with many attributes and features, and we added runs
that explored responses of different demographic groups one by one, all of which increased
the cost of our exploration. For example, the cost of running Study 2A on GPT-3.5 Turbo was
about $100, whereas adding one feature with two levels (with/without projector) in Study 2B
increased the cost to about $500. However, we expect these costs to decline dramatically over
time, and there are already multiple steps researchers can take to make our approach cheaper.
When we learned that GPT responses converge quickly (see Web Appendix G) we were able
to reduce the number of repetitions per prompt from 150 to 50. Moreover, OpenAI now offers
batch queries which offer 50% lower costs for responses within 24 hours, which helped reduce
the costs farther (i.e., the cost for Study 2B on a fine-tuned model were reduced from $2,600 to
roughly $433 when applying both of these changes.), and new generations of LLMs continue
to become cheaper to query and fine-tune. W3 While we expect that these costs will go down
over time, as LLMs are commoditized, we also expect that firms that adopt our methodology
W3For example, after we completed our analysis, OpenAI announced their newest model, “GPT-4o mini",
which is 60% cheaper per token than GPT-3.5 Turbo, and Meta introduced a 405B parameter open source LLM
that is marketed as comparable to OpenAI’s and Anthropic’s advanced models (See https: //openai.com/index/
gpt-4o-mini-advancing-cost-efficient-intelligence / and https://ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3-1 /.)
W-15

===PAGE BREAK===

will likely train and fine-tune an open-source LLM, which will significantly reduce costs.
W-16

===PAGE BREAK===

F Sample GPT Responses
F .1 Responses for Study 1B
• “I chose the Colgate toothpaste, it has fluoride and mint flavor.”
• “I would choose to purchase the Colgate toothpaste with the cinnamon flavor for $1.99
since it has fluoride, which is beneficial for my teeth.”
• “I’d like to try the new flavor of Crest toothpaste with Cucumber. It sounds interesting
and I don’t mind the extra cost for the fluoride option.”
• “I would like to try the new flavors. I choose not to purchase either of the available
toothpaste options today .”
F .2 Responses for Study 2A
• “I decided to purchase the Microsoft Surface Laptop with 32GB RAM, 256GB storage,
and 15-inch size for $1000.”
• “I chose to purchase the Apple MacBook Air.”
• “I chose not to purchase either of the available laptops on that day .”
• “I would choose Option 2: Apple MacBook Air, because it has more storage space com-
pared to the Microsoft Surface Laptop.”
• “I would go with option 1, the Apple MacBook Air. The specs meet my requirements and
the price is more affordable compared to the Microsoft Surface Laptop.”
• “I chose to purchase the Microsoft Surface Laptop as it had better specs for my needs,
even though it was a bit pricier than the Apple MacBook Air.”
• “I would choose the Microsoft Surface Laptop as it fits my budget better and has similar
specifications to the Apple MacBook Air.”
W-17

===PAGE BREAK===

G Robustness and Additional Results
G.1 Consistency in GPT Estimates
Initially , we prompted GPT 150 times for each consideration set we wanted it to consider.
Then, we randomly sampled the responses and estimated WTP to evaluate the consistency in
its responses. Because of the costs of running GPT (especially the costs of querying the fine-
tuned models), and given the consistency in the responses, we decided to reduce the number
of repetitions to 50.
The table below reports the WTP estimates implied by Study 2B for different randomly selected
sub samples of the data. Note that for Study 2B, given the number of attributes and levels, the
total number of queries was: 3,483,000. This is because the total number of configurations is:
(2 Brands X 3 Prices X 3 Storage X 3 RAM X 2 Size X 2 Projector), and the number of consid-
eration sets of two products that include only options that differ from each other on at least
one attribute based on n configurations is n×(n−1)
2 . We collected 150 responses per set. Note
that due to the fact that some responses did not include a clear choice, we used 99.7% of GPT
responses, and the total number of choices used in estimation for this study was 3,473,621. We
also note that to produce the table below, the standard error calculations for the multinomial
logit (as if the data was from a random sample of consumers) imply tight confidence intervals
even for the 10% sample, and for most of the attributes in the 1% sample.
Table W2: WTP Estimates based on GPT Study 2B Responses
100% 50% 25% 10% 1%
Surface 922.83 918.90 926.33 927.83 868.64
Macbook 819.53 815.94 823.70 824.95 764.97
RAM 14.50 14.51 14.49 14.51 14.41
Storage 0.48 0.48 0.47 0.48 0.48
Size -12.48 -12.27 -12.64 -13.21 -9.84
Projector 1074.31 1076.26 1070.69 1081.14 1074.88
Notes: Each Column reports the WTP estimates based on a randomly
selected sample of different size, where Column 1 uses 100% of the
sample, and Column 2 uses 50% of the sample.
G.2 Comparing GPT and Humans Across Demographic Groups
Table W3 reports the comparison of WTP and no purchase rates from humans and GPT for
Study 2A, and Table W4 reports the same for Study 2B. For Study 2A, we simply report WTP
estimates based on our human sample and the responses from GPT . For Study 2B, we present
W-18

===PAGE BREAK===

the results from GPT as is, and from a fine-tuned version of GPT , where we fine-tune GPT-3.5
Turbo with the Study 2A responses, but we modified the prompt to include the income and
gender of the customer, based on our survey responses. For example, if the survey respondent
was a female with income bracket $75,000—$150,000 the training prompt was adapted to say
“You are a female customer with an annual income of $75,000—$150,000. You are selected...".
Out of the 302 responses for Study 2A, we had 6 cases with missing income or gender, and
so we omitted them from the fine-tuning data. We then queried the fine-tuned GPT with
Study 2B questions where we separately ask about different income level, gender, and political
affiliation.
W-19

===PAGE BREAK===

Table W3: WTP Estimates from Study 2A for Human and GPT Demographics Groups
Group Sample RAM Storage Size MacBook Opt out
Income
Human < $50K 35% 17.8 0.63 69.6 12.5 49%
Human $50-74,999 21% 26.5 0.82 82.2 32.2 50%
Human $75-150K 29% 22.1 0.47 68.3 51.1 52%
Human > $150K 13% 19.4 0.48 47.8 225.6 47%
GPT < $50K -4.4 0.05 -27.3 -2.6 95%
GPT $50-74,999 2.5 0.19 -27.1 39.0 34%
GPT $75-150K 22.9 0.61 1.2ˆ 176.0 19%
GPT > $150K 99.6 2.31 126.4 722.5 34%
Gender
Human MALE 44% 22.9 0.63 87.2 -46.9 55%
Human FEMALE 54% 19.1 0.57 47.8 164.9 46%
GPT MALE 15.2 0.52 -1.5 17.3 9%
GPT FEMALE 13.5 0.53 -27.3 113.8 26%
Political Affiliation
Human REPUBLICAN 15% 16.2 0.57 80.8 41.7 53%
Human DEMOCRAT 52% 19.5 0.52 57.7 113.4 50%
GPT REPUBLICAN 5.5 0.26 1.2ˆ -252.0 27%
GPT DEMOCRAT 16.2 0.37 -24.5 373.4 41%
Race and Ethnicity
Human WHITE 70% 25.8 0.79 94.8 60.1 54%
Human BLACK 10% 15.9 0.28 58.3 -52.1 37%
GPT WHITE 13.7 0.52 -26.1 315.1 21%
GPT BLACK 15.4 0.54 -1.4ˆ -135.5 65%
Education
Human NO COLLEGE 39% 21.0 0.68 84.9 -61.4 48%
Human ONLY COLLEGE 44% 20.5 0.57 55.0 128.4 55%
GPT NO COLLEGE -0.5 0.18 -25.9 -48.6 55%
GPT COLLEGE 21.4 0.67 -25.8 -92.9 46%
Age
Human AGE <28 25% 20.7 0.43 23.5ˆ 77.6ˆ 52%
Human [28-42] 50% 19.4 0.70 84.9 92.5 45%
Human AGE >42 25% 25.7 0.56 86.6 -40.5 59%
GPT AGE <28 9.0 0.36 -40.3 21.6 31%
GPT [28-42] 15.0 0.53 -8.4 39.3 11%
GPT AGE >42 19.2 0.76 1.5ˆ 74.7 29%
Notes: For our comparison, we use human groups which make up at least 10% of the human
sample. The Column “Sample” indicates what fraction of the human sample corresponds
with this group. Column “Macbook” indicates the preference for Macbook (over Surface).
Column “Opt out” indicates the no purchase shares.” The Human “No College” sample in-
cludes all of those who didn’t start or complete college. Age splits are based on quartiles.
For the GPT samples, 50 responses were collected for each group. See prompts in Web Ap-
pendix E. The symbol ˆ indicates cases where the confidence interval in the multinomial
logit for a specific attribute included zero.
W-20

===PAGE BREAK===

Table W4: WTP Estimates from Study 2B for Human and GPT Demographics Groups
Group Sample RAM Storage Size MacBook Projector Opt out
Income
Human < $50K 30% 18.0 0.39 74.9 -52.7 219.1 48%
Human $50-74,999 22% 23.7 0.62 127.2 119.7 423.5 35%
Human $75-150K 34% 19.3 0.77 29.5 212.1 430.0 41%
Human > $150K 11% 17.0 0.44 58.4 203.7 142.0 45%
GPT < $50K -2.2 0.09 -28.5 -27.9 -118.2 85%
GPT $50-74,999 4.8 0.23 -24.8 -35.1 142.9 37%
GPT $75-150K 14.5 0.47 -15.9 -70.0 636.8 24%
GPT > $150K 103.9 2.44 73.9 -182.9 2786.6 48%
GPT-FT < $50K 20.5 0.47 26.6 46.7 169.4 48%
GPT-FT $50-74,999 21.6 0.48 26.1 58.9 169.4 49%
GPT-FT $75-150K 23.5 0.52 29.7 52.1 173.6 48%
GPT-FT > $150K 25.1 0.54 28.7 60.5 191.7 48%
Gender
Human MALE 43% 19.9 0.47 65.3 -50.2 288.3 43%
Human FEMALE 56% 18.2 0.64 65.6 249.2 350.9 42%
GPT MALE 11.1 0.37 -14.8 -74.2 756.4 11%
GPT FEMALE 11.5 0.40 -23.0 -73.4 976.8 18%
GPT FT MALE 21.7 0.51 29.6 45.2 176.3 49%
GPT FT FEMALE 20.9 0.49 16.7 56.7 170.8 44%
Political Affiliation
Human REPUBLICAN 23% 16.9 0.57 28.9 -101.2 255.1 41%
Human DEMOCRAT 40% 15.8 0.44 52.5 308.9 308.4 39%
GPT REPUBLICAN 3.5 0.15 -6.8 -133.5 -57.6 24%
GPT DEMOCRAT 10.0 0.20 -23.8 -29.9 817.5 41%
GPT-FT REPUBLICAN 22.7 0.49 22.6 67.6 195.9 47%
GPT-FT DEMOCRAT 23.1 0.50 31.3 52.1 176.9 48%
Notes: For our comparison, we use human groups which make up at least 10% of the human sample.
The Column “Sample” indicates what fraction of the human sample corresponds with this group. Col-
umn “Macbook” indicates the preference for Macbook (over Surface). Column “Opt out” indicates the
no purchase shares.” For the GPT-3.5 Turbo samples, 50 responses were collected for each group, for
the fine tuned model (GPT-FT in the table), 30 responses were collected for each group. See prompts
in Web Appendix E.
W-21

===PAGE BREAK===

W-22