applied  
sciences 
Article
A Novel Framework for Identifying Customers’
Unmet Needs on Online Social Media Using
Context Tree
Taehoon Ko 1
 , Ilsun Rhiu 2
 , Myung Hwan Yun 3
 and Sungzoon Cho 3,*
1 Department of Medical Informatics, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 06591, Korea;
thko@catholic.ac.kr
2 Division of Future Convergence (HCI Science Major), Dongduk Women’s University, Seoul 02748, Korea;
isrhiu@dongduk.ac.kr
3 Department of Industrial Engineering & Institute for Industrial System Innovation,
Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea; mhy@snu.ac.kr
* Correspondence: zoon@snu.ac.kr; Tel.: +82-2-880-6275
Received: 10 October 2020; Accepted: 25 November 2020; Published: 27 November 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Customer needs and user contexts play an important role in generating ideas for new
products or new functions. This study proposes a novel framework for identifying customers’ unmet
needs on online social media using the Context Tree through the Hierarchical Search of Concept
Spaces (HSCS) algorithm. The Context Tree represents the hierarchical structure of nodes associated
with related keywords and corresponding concept spaces. Unlike other methods, the Context Tree
focuses on ﬁnding the unmet needs of customers from online social media. The proposed framework
is applied to extract customer needs for home appliances. Identiﬁed customer needs are used to make
user scenarios, which are used to develop new functions of home appliances.
Keywords: Context Tree; HSCS algorithm; customer needs; user context; online social media
1. Introduction
In respect of user-centered design (UCD), customer needs contribute signiﬁcantly to determining
the initial direction of the new product development (NPD) process [ 1]. Customer needs refer to
the various attributes of the potential product that the customer requires, also known as customer
attributes or customer requirements. Considering customers’ unmet needs in the early stages of the
NPD process, the design direction of new functions and speciﬁcations for the new product can be
quickly set [ 2,3]. In addition, many studies have claimed that it is important to constantly grasp
customers’ unmet needs and consider them in the full-cycle NPD process [4–7].
Companies attempt to identify customer needs through various channels, such as prototype,
market research, focus group interview (FGI), and user observation [8–10]. These methods generate
knowledge through question and answer between experimenter and user. However, these methods
have several drawbacks. The answers of participants tend to be induced by the experimenter [ 11].
In addition, the survey method does not even provide hidden meaning to the basis of the results [12].
Recently, online social media has become an important area for investigating customer
preferences [13]. Online social media is deﬁned as services that enable users to establish online
connections with their friends through the application and share information with them [14]. It has
great potential to generate new knowledge and business value [15]. There is increasing use of social
media data to derive customer needs. In marketing, some studies that attempt to extract insights
for promotional strategies from social media are underway [16–18]. To derive perceptions of people,
the sentiment analysis methods can be applied to social media text [ 19]. These studies focus on
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473; doi:10.3390/app10238473 www.mdpi.com /journal/applsci

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 2 of 20
calculating the number or ratio of keyword frequencies or latent topics in retrospectively collected
data. However, while these studies are useful for ﬁnding customer context retrospectively, it is more
important to ﬁnd needs that do not satisfy customers in terms of NPD and UCD.
This study proposes a quantitative approach to identifying customers’ unmet needs in online social
media, such as social network services (SNSs) or blog services. The proposed method is Context Tree,
which is a tree structure expressing user context while searching for related keywords hierarchically.
Each node of the Context Tree corresponds to a representative keyword and its related keywords.
Various experiences of users with keywords are summarized in each node. On the business side, users’
summarized experiences can be used to derive the new features or speciﬁcations of new products.
To create the Context Tree, it is necessary to collect a large amount of text data from online social
media and pre-process the data using natural language processing (NLP) techniques. The branches
of the Context Tree are expanded by the Hierarchical Search of Concept Spaces (HSCS) algorithm,
which is proposed by this study. The HSCS algorithm’s purpose is to ﬁnd unmet needs for the target
product in online social media data, especially text data. This algorithm ﬁgures out hierarchically
summarized user experiences for the target product p of the NPD process through related keywords to
p. Furthermore, it links user experiences, which are not relevant to p and are relevant to p’s-related
keywords. The speciﬁc process of the HSCS algorithm is described in Section 3.2.
To verify the Context Tree generated by the HSCS algorithm, the proposed framework is used to
discover ideas for implementing the NPD process for major home appliances. Target online social
media data includes tweets on Twitter and blog posts on Korean web portals.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, several studies on market
research, idea generation, and social media data are summarized. In Section 3, the Context Tree
proposed in this study is introduced. Then, how the HSCS algorithm creates a Context Tree to ﬁnd
unmet needs is described in detail. Section 4 describes the online social media data and experimental
settings used to show the e ﬀectiveness of the proposed method. Section 5 describes the result of
creating the Context Tree from online social media data using the HSCS algorithm. For the ﬁve home
appliances that are targeted, user contexts found in online social media and improvement scenarios for
each product are created accordingly. In Section 6, a detailed discussion of the proposed method and
experimental results are provided. Section 7 contains the conclusion of this study.
2. Literature Review
2.1. Methods for Identifying Customer Needs
This section describes the four most widely used methods of identifying customer needs, such as
prototype, market research, FGI, and user observation [8–10]. Prototyping helps develop new products
for selected subjects and obtain feedback. This method can be used when the product speciﬁcation
is clearly deﬁned. Market research methods: market research refers to methods of delivering the
questionnaire to many people and analyzing their responses. Structured questions about newly
developed products or services are constructed, and individual opinions are recorded. It is important
to conﬁgure the questions appropriately at an early stage to understand what potential users think
about the product. FGI is an in-depth interview with a small group of potential users of products and
services. The target size is small in comparison to market research; however, it is considered to obtain
a more speciﬁc picture of what users think. Users’ observation methods help thoroughly understand
users’ behaviors and analyze their problems and needs. The data analyzed by the experts include
images or written texts of users’ daily records.
Despite being widely used, they have several drawbacks from the point of view of identifying
customers’ unmet needs. The ﬁrst weakness is that most of the methods require substantial monetary
and time costs. It takes a lot of time and money to develop a prototype to obtain a user’s feedback.
Market research and user observation often incur large costs due to the recruitment of participants and
compensation for responses. The second weakness occurs in terms of sample size. Prototypes, FGI,

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 3 of 20
and user’s observation require substantial money and time to increase sample sizes for investigation.
In market research, the more people who participate in the survey, the higher is the cost. The bigger
problem, however, is that the speciﬁcity of survey results may deteriorate due to limitations on the
number of questionnaires [20]. The third weakness is that people who participate in surveys already
know the intentions of marketers. For example, if the company conducts a survey on a new product
right after users experience it, some of them become aware of not only the intent of the questionnaire
but also the responses the company wants [11]. This is likely to lead to biased results.
Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the four methods discussed above.
Table 1. Properties of conventional methods for identifying customer needs [10,11,20].
Monetary Cost Time Cost Sample Size Risk of Exposing
the Intent of Questionnaire
Prototype high high small very high
Market Research high high large high
Focus Group
Interview (relatively) medium high small high
User’s Observation high high very small high
2.2. Idea Generation and Market Research
Girotra et al. deﬁned the term ‘idea’ as several possible solutions to organizational problems [6].
This study examined the idea generation process through brainstorming in detail. Trott claimed that
market research is more eﬀective in the new product development (NPD) process when the diﬀerence
in understanding of techniques between customers and the company is smaller [ 21]. Witell et al.
showed that market research techniques could express manifest needs, though they have diﬃculty
transferring latent needs in certain contexts [22]. Market research techniques, which concentrate on
capturing customers’ previous experiences with a product or service, have been designed so that the
participants respond to stimuli from the company [23].
Some studies showed the eﬀect of crowdsourcing in terms of idea generation for a new product.
Poetz and Schreier showed that both professionals and general users could provide ideas to solve an
eﬀective and relevant problem in the consumer goods market for baby products [24]. They evaluated
all ideas derived by professionals and general users in terms of key quality dimensions, including
novelty, customer beneﬁt, and feasibility. Consequently, although they are blind to the source of ideas,
users give ideas that are as eﬀective as those from professionals. Bayus researched a case study with
the Dell IdeaStorm community [25]. This study analyzed the pattern of crowdsourced and showed
that initial generated ideas were the most eﬀective in solving real business problems.
2.3. Studies in Various Business Fields Using Social Media Data
Schivinski and Dabrowski showed the e ﬀect of social media communication on consumer’s
perceptions of brands [18]. This study compared the impact of ﬁrm-created and user-generated social
media communication on brand equity, brand attitude, and purchase intention. This study claimed that
user-generated social media communication had a positive inﬂuence on both brand equity and attitude,
while ﬁrm-created communication aﬀected only brand attitude. Kim and Ko proposed attributes of
social media marketing activities and examined the relationships among those perceived activities,
such as value equity, relation equity, brand equity, customer equity, and purchase intention, through a
structural equation model [26]. They claimed that value and relationship equity had signiﬁcant positive
eﬀects on purchase intention.
Some studies focused on extracting actionable topics, information, and knowledge from online
social media data to solve business problems. Saha and Sindhwani proposed a framework for
modeling the topic of evolution and discovering emerging themes in social media [ 27]. McAuley
and Leskovec combined latent rating dimensions with latent review topic made by latent Dirichlet
allocation (LDA) [28]. Tuarob and Tucker extracted information on several smartphones from Twitter

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 4 of 20
to predict product demand and longevity [29]. They analyzed tweets and ﬁgured out several strong,
weak, and controversial features of each smartphone. Furthermore, they claimed a strong correlation
between positive tweets and sales for each smartphone. Timoshenko and Hauser analyzed oral-care
users’ reviews on Amazon, spanning the period from 1996 to 2014. This study used word embedding
and convolutional neural network (CNN) to classify informative and uninformative sentences from
users’ reviews. After that, non-repetitive sentences were identiﬁed through domain experts to derive
the insights necessary for marketing actions [13]. Ko et al. used latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) to
extract topics from user reviews on Reddit.com [30]. This study constructed a KeyGraph based on
the co-occurrences among the topics. Kühl et al. compared the insights on electric vehicles derived
through literature and the insights derived by analyzing tweets on Twitter [31]. Jeong et al. applied
the topic modeling method, especially latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA), to users’ reviews on Samsung
Galaxy Note 5 to identify several topics and their sentiment weights [32]. Reisenbichler and Reutterer
discussed how to use topic modeling methods in the marketing area [33].
Studies ﬁnding users’ experiences on speciﬁc products in online social media are published.
Rhiu and Yun searched keywords in tweets and blog posts related to smartphones. They ﬁgured
out that there were unsatisfactory experiences for using smartphones in terms of multi-functionality
and connectivity [11]. Kim et al. analyzed user ratings and reviews on recliners on Amazon and
found 15 clusters for a ﬀected users’ experience of recliners [ 34]. Joung et al. analyzed customer
complaints about air-conditioners using feature selection and clustering to identify requirements at
which customers want to obtain help from products [35]. He et al. conducted a case study to analyze
tweets about laptop brands. Through sentiment analysis, this study quantitatively analyzed how
positive and negative people had thoughts of each laptop brand [36].
The above-mentioned studies are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2. Related studies using online social media.
Study Purpose Target Online Social Media or
Data Methods
Schivinski and Dabrowski (2016)
[18]
Figure out consumers
perceptions of brands Facebook Structural equation model
Kim and Ko (2012)
[26]
Demonstrate the eﬀectiveness
of social media marketing Questionnaires Structural equation model
Saha and Sindhwani (2012)
[27]
Capture the evolution and
emergence of topics in social
media
U.S. National Institute of
Standards and Technology
(NIST) Topic Detection and
Tracking (TDT) corpus
Dynamic non-negative
matrix factorization (NMF)
McAuley and Leskovic (2013)
[28]
Find the relationship between
hidden factors in ratings and
hidden topic in reviews
Reviews on Amazon and Yelp
Latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA), hidden factors as
topics (HFT)
Tuarob and Tucker (2013)
[29]
Obtain information on
smartphones to predict
product demand and
longevity
Tweets on Twitter Sentimental analysis
Timoshenko and Hauser (2019
[13]
Select informative sentences
for identifying customer needs Reviews on Amazon
Word embedding and
convolutional neural
network (CNN)
Ko et al. (2017)
[30]
Extract topics for generating
product opportunities Reviews on Reddit Latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA), Keygraph
Kühl et al. (2019)
[31]
Extract and categorize
customer needs Tweets on Twitter Keyword searching
Jeong et al. (2019)
[32]
Extract topics and
corresponding sentiments Reviews on Reddit Latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA), Sentiment analysis
Reisenbichler and Reutterer (2019)
[33]
Review paper about topic
modeling in marketing - -
Rhiu and Yun (2018)
[11]
Explore users’ experience of
smartphones Tweets on Twitter Keyword searching

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 5 of 20
Table 2. Cont.
Study Purpose Target Online Social Media or
Data Methods
Kim et al. (2019)
[34]
Extract aﬀective user
experience of recliners Reviews on Amazon Self-organizing map (SOM)
Joung et al. (2019)
[35] Cluster customer complaints Customer complaints Hierarchical clustering
He et al. (2019)
[36]
Extract topics and
corresponding sentiments Tweets on Twitter Sentiment analysis
3. Proposed Method
This section provides a speciﬁc description of the proposed methods for identifying customers’
unmet needs in online social media. The proposed framework consists of the following steps, illustrated
in Figure 1. First, documents (or short paragraphs) written by the public should be collected from
online social media and preprocessed to analyze the data. In this step, NLP techniques are used to
normalize text data. After that, a keyword search is performed within the collected data using the
HSCS algorithm. The HSCS algorithm designates a target product as a primal keyword and then
searches not only the current user’s experience but also the basis of customers’ unmet needs by using
related keywords. The basis for unmet demand can be used to design new features or speciﬁcations
for target products in the future.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 20 
 
Figure 1. Proposed pipeline for identifying customers’ unmet needs using the Context Tree. 
3.1. Gathering and Pre-Processing the Online Social Media Data 
The first step is to determine the target online social media. Social media has highly diverse 
categories with numerous topic types. Social network services (SNSs), such as Twitter, Facebook, and 
LinkedIn, can enable gathering opinions from the unspecific majority, or comments by readers on 
various news sites and writing on  community sites, such as R eddit, where various topics are 
discussed, can be good analysis targets. Although this study focuses on texts, services, such as 
Instagram, can also be considered if image data an d corresponding hashtags are analyzed together. 
In addition, if customer’s needs to specific domains are required, companies can target comments on 
movie review sites or online shopping sites. 
Once the target data is determined, it is necess ary to search for a method to collect them. For 
online social media data collection, it is preferable to use application programming interfaces (APIs) 
of corresponding sites [37]. Note that APIs may no t provide the data fields preferred by users or 
limited data quantities and collection time while using APIs. A strategic partnership may be 
necessary to utilize APIs or to share costs. In addition, companies may utilize dumped data disclosed 
for the purpose of research. Sites, such as Wikipedia, where various users participate, often provide 
updated dumped data, and Amazon.com discloses product review data for the purpose of research. 
A proactive method of gathering data is web page information through the web scrapping technique 
and extracting values that correspond to required data fields using HTML parsers. 
After data gathering, preprocessing should be  conducted. For text data, Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) tools in accordance with a language type should be used [38]. The important things 
in the proposed framework particularly are word  extraction, word normalization, and out-of-
vocabulary problem-solving. Word extraction extracts words used by the majority from free-formed 
texts. The word ‘normalization’ refers to a conversion from changed terms into basic type words, 
Figure 1. Proposed pipeline for identifying customers’ unmet needs using the Context Tree.

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 6 of 20
3.1. Gathering and Pre-Processing the Online Social Media Data
The ﬁrst step is to determine the target online social media. Social media has highly diverse
categories with numerous topic types. Social network services (SNSs), such as Twitter, Facebook,
and LinkedIn, can enable gathering opinions from the unspeciﬁc majority, or comments by readers on
various news sites and writing on community sites, such as Reddit, where various topics are discussed,
can be good analysis targets. Although this study focuses on texts, services, such as Instagram,
can also be considered if image data and corresponding hashtags are analyzed together. In addition,
if customer’s needs to speciﬁc domains are required, companies can target comments on movie review
sites or online shopping sites.
Once the target data is determined, it is necessary to search for a method to collect them. For online
social media data collection, it is preferable to use application programming interfaces (APIs) of
corresponding sites [37]. Note that APIs may not provide the data ﬁelds preferred by users or limited
data quantities and collection time while using APIs. A strategic partnership may be necessary to
utilize APIs or to share costs. In addition, companies may utilize dumped data disclosed for the
purpose of research. Sites, such as Wikipedia, where various users participate, often provide updated
dumped data, and Amazon.com discloses product review data for the purpose of research. A proactive
method of gathering data is web page information through the web scrapping technique and extracting
values that correspond to required data ﬁelds using HTML parsers.
After data gathering, preprocessing should be conducted. For text data, Natural Language
Processing (NLP) tools in accordance with a language type should be used [38]. The important things in
the proposed framework particularly are word extraction, word normalization, and out-of-vocabulary
problem-solving. Word extraction extracts words used by the majority from free-formed texts. The word
‘normalization’ refers to a conversion from changed terms into basic type words, which is signiﬁcantly
conducive to unifying information inside texts [39]. Tokenizing, part-of-speech tagging, stemming, and
lemmatizing are necessary for word extraction and normalization, as a general procedure in NLP [40].
• Tokenizing: It is the extraction of linguistic units (e.g., words, phrases, or speciﬁc sequences
of characters) used by people from unstructured texts. A white space and punctuations that
determine the boundary of such units are often used in tokenizing, and variations, such as a
change in character types, collocations, and idioms, are also considered in the tokenizing process.
• Part-of-speech (POS) tagging: POS tagging is the process of assigning part-of-speech tags,
including noun, verb, adjective, adverb, etc., to words in a sentence or corpus. A POS tagger
determines a POS tag for each word, considering a sentence structure and surrounding context.
For English, the Penn Treebank tag set has been widely used. In this framework, it is necessary
to derive nouns that refer to objects, adjectives and adverbs that reveal emotion, and verbs that
express actions through POS tagging.
• Stemming: This is the process of transforming several words into a base root form. For example,
‘computer’, ‘computing’, ‘computed’, and ‘computation’ are transformed into a root form of
‘comput’. Stemming enables information collection from within documents containing the four
existing words in an integrated manner.
• Lemmatizing: Lemmatizing also refers to the summarization of words utilized in various
forms into a single representative lemma. Stemming considers only processing target words,
whereas lemmatizing considers elements to identify the surrounding contexts, for example,
part-of-speech (POS) tags. Thus, lemmatizing takes more time than stemming.
The most diﬃcult aspect of analyzing social media data is processing slang or jargon [41]. Note
that the importance of processing slang or jargon can diﬀer with analysis topics. For example, if the
purpose is to infer a user’s experience of a speciﬁc product, as shown in the case study later, processing
slang or jargon is necessary in terms of emotional perspective. That is, a process to express speciﬁc
emotions used by developing a separate dictionary without the need to change all slangs and jargons

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 7 of 20
into semantically similar words. Accordingly, the number of terms to be processed becomes smaller,
reducing the cost in terms of time taken for pre-processing.
3.2. Constructing the Context T ree Using Hierarchical Search Concept Space (HSCS) Algorithm
After the completion of data gathering and pre-processing, the Context Tree, a novel model that
represents the user’s context and unmet needs in online social media, is ready to be created. The Context
Tree refers to a data structure that extends branches by searching other detailed keywords related
to a speciﬁc keyword iteratively. The Hierarchical Search Concept Space (HSCS) algorithm is also
proposed as a method that creates the Context Tree. This algorithm has the property of simple ontology.
A node in each tree refers to a corresponding keyword, and writings, including the corresponding
keyword and parent keywords, belong to the node. In addition to this, a process to extract the user’s
experience that can infer the unmet needs of users by controlling the inclusion and exclusion of words
is included in the HSCS algorithm. The Context Tree enables intuitive and structural insight search
for people who participate in the NPD process by summarizing documents that correspond to the
keyword array eﬀectively.
The detailed description of the HSCS algorithm for creating the Context Tree is as follows.
3.2.1. Determining the Primal Keyword
Before describing the process of constructing Context Trees, two important terms must be deﬁned.
First is a concept space, which is represented by some documents with an arbitrary keyword or keyword
set. In this research, the target documents are the articles of the public on social media. Therefore,
the concept space is a space that collects contexts that the public thinks about the corresponding
keyword or keyword set. The other term is a primal keyword, which is a word that represents the target
object. In the NPD process, the primal keyword refers to a term that is the target product itself or closely
related to the product. To acquire insights for new functions or speciﬁcations about speciﬁc products,
for example, users’ experiences should be searched in social media. In this regard, the primal keyword
becomes the product itself. The primal keyword serves as a seed query to construct the Context Tree.
Assume that the primal keyword is p, the concept space of overall social media data is U,
and document, including the determined primal keyword p, is a concept space P . As the size of U is
large in general, the relationship|U|≫|P| is established. This progress so far is depicted in Figure 2.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 20 
product itself or closely related to the product. To acquire insights for new functions or specifications 
about specific products, for example, users’ experiences should be searched in social media. In this 
regard, the primal keyword becomes the product itself. The primal keyword serves as a seed query 
to construct the Context Tree. 
Assume that the primal keyword is ݌the concept space of over all social media data is U, and 
document, including the determined primal keyword ,݌is a concept space P. As the size of U is 
large in general, the relationship |U| ≫ |P| is established. This progress so far is depicted in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Initializing the Context Tree using the primal keyword. 
3.2.2. Finding Related Keywords that Appear with the Primal Keyword 
This step extends the Context Tree by extracting related keywords ௣  from 
documents that correspond to ܲIt is now necessary to evaluate the association between the primal 
keyword ݌and other words to extract related keywords. This study calculates co-occurrences of the 
primal keyword ݌and every word and selects words with high co-occurrence as related keywords. 
The document data space, where these two keywords are included, is called concept spaces. Wଵ,Wଶ, 
two concept spaces P∩W ଵ, P∩W ଶ can be obtained when the Context Tree is extended once, as 
shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. Extending the Context Tree with related keywords. 
Figure 2. Initializing the Context Tree using the primal keyword.

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 8 of 20
3.2.2. Finding Related Keywords that Appear with the Primal Keyword
This step extends the Context Tree by extracting related keywords w1, w2, w3, . . ., wp from
documents that correspond to P. It is now necessary to evaluate the association between the primal
keyword P and other words to extract related keywords. This study calculates co-occurrences of the
primal keyword p and every word and selects words with high co-occurrence as related keywords.
The document data space, where these two keywords are included, is called concept spaces. W1, W2,
two concept spaces P∩ W1, P∩ W2 can be obtained when the Context Tree is extended once, as shown
in Figure 3.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 20 
product itself or closely related to the product. To acquire insights for new functions or specifications 
about specific products, for example, users’ experiences should be searched in social media. In this 
regard, the primal keyword becomes the product itself. The primal keyword serves as a seed query 
to construct the Context Tree. 
Assume that the primal keyword is ݌the concept space of over all social media data is U, and 
document, including the determined primal keyword ,݌is a concept space P. As the size of U is 
large in general, the relationship |U| ≫ |P| is established. This progress so far is depicted in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Initializing the Context Tree using the primal keyword. 
3.2.2. Finding Related Keywords that Appear with the Primal Keyword 
This step extends the Context Tree by extracting related keywords ௣  from 
documents that correspond to ܲIt is now necessary to evaluate the association between the primal 
keyword ݌and other words to extract related keywords. This study calculates co-occurrences of the 
primal keyword ݌and every word and selects words with high co-occurrence as related keywords. 
The document data space, where these two keywords are included, is called concept spaces. Wଵ,Wଶ, 
two concept spaces P∩W ଵ, P∩W ଶ can be obtained when the Context Tree is extended once, as 
shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. Extending the Context Tree with related keywords. 
Figure 3. Extending the Context Tree with related keywords.
3.2.3. Finding Related Keywords Recursively
This step iterates the above process constantly. Let us assume that related keywords extracted
by analyzing the document data, where previously extracted wi appears, are called wi j, and the
corresponding concept space is called Wij. Here, child nodes of the Context Tree refer to P∩ Wi∩ Wij
concept spaces. As this process is progressed once, the Context Tree is extended a step further.
Furthermore, a narrower concept space can be generated as the extension is progressed further.
3.2.4. Discovering Contexts in Each Node of the Context Tree
Each node of the Context Tree has documents containing words, such as the target product p and
its related keyword wi, etc. From these documents, contexts that correspond to each concept space can
be searched and discovered. These contexts represent public awareness of the target products and
their utility.
To prevent this problem, this study employed a method that identiﬁed the user’s context from the
corresponding concept space based on the extracted related keywords. Extracting user contexts using
related keywords has advantages of not only convenient expert interpretation but also quantitative
evaluation through the frequency of keywords that respond to the corresponding context.
3.2.5. Discovering Contexts Used for Expanding the Concept Space of the Target Product
This step attempts to discover contexts that cannot be solved or correspond to the current target
product. To discover the corresponding context, it is important to use documents whose related
keyword wi of the primary keyword p is present, but p is not present. They belong to Pc∩ Wi in the
concept space. The result of expanding the Context Tree is illustrated in Figure 4.

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 9 of 20
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 20 
3.2.3. Finding Related Keywords Recursively 
This step iterates the above process constantly. Let us assume that rela ted keywords extracted 
by analyzing the document data, where previously extracted ௜  appears, are called ௜௝ , and the 
corresponding concept space is called W୧୨. Here, child nodes of the Context Tree refer to P∩W ୧ ∩W ୧୨ 
concept spaces. As this process is progressed on ce, the Context Tree is extended a step further. 
Furthermore, a narrower concept space can be generated as the extension is progressed further. 
3.2.4. Discovering Contexts in Each Node of the Context Tree 
Each node of the Context Tree has documents cont aining words, such as the target product ݌ 
and its related keyword ௜, etc. From these documents, contexts that correspond to each concept 
space can be searched and discovered. These cont exts represent public awareness of the target 
products and their utility. 
To prevent this problem, this study employed a method that identified the user’s context from 
the corresponding concept space based on the extrac ted related keywords. Extracting user contexts 
using related keywords has advantages of not on ly convenient expert interpretation but also 
quantitative evaluation through the frequency of keywords that respond to the corresponding 
context. 
3.2.5. Discovering Contexts Used for Expanding the Concept Space of the Target Product 
This step attempts to discover contexts that cannot be solved or correspond to the current target 
product. To discover the corresponding context, it is important to use documents whose related 
keyword ݓ
௜ of the primary keyword ݌is present, but ݌is not present. They belong to Pୡ ∩W ୧ in 
the concept space. The result of expanding the Context Tree is illustrated in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4. Discovering contexts used for expanding the concept space of the target product. 
If some parts can be solved by new functions or specifying the target product among the 
contexts, the concept space P of the existing target product can be scalable to larger P′. Furthermore, 
Pᇱ ∩P ୡ ∩W ୧  refers to potential areas where the target product can be used to satisfy customers’ 
unmet needs. They become a source for developing new functions or specifications of the target 
product. The following Figure 5 shows the detailed description. 
Figure 4. Discovering contexts used for expanding the concept space of the target product.
If some parts can be solved by new functions or specifying the target product among the
contexts, the concept space P of the existing target product can be scalable to larger P′. Furthermore,
P′∩ Pc∩ Wi refers to potential areas where the target product can be used to satisfy customers’ unmet
needs. They become a source for developing new functions or speciﬁcations of the target product.
The following Figure 5 shows the detailed description.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 20 
 
Figure 5. Expanding the concept space of the target product. (a) The concept space P is expanded to 
P′. ( b) Shaded spaces can be regarded as evidence  for the customer’s unmet needs and the new 
function of the target product. 
The HSCS algorithm described so far is summarized in Table 3. 
Table 3. Hierarchical Search of Concept Spaces (HSCS) algorithm. 
Algorithm 1: Hierarchical Search of Concept Spaces (HSCS) 
1. Determine the primal keyword ࢖ .
2. Extract documents including ࢖Assign this corpus to concept space ۾ .
3. Define the function named Pipeline (input_space = I, number_of_keywords = n): 
i) Preprocess the corpus in I. (tokenizing → POS tagging → stemming and lemmatizing 
→ Processing slang or jargon) 
ii) Sort words by frequency in descending order and determine the top- words  
ሻ . 
iii) Extract documents including ࢏࢝Assign this corpus to each concept space ܑ܅  .
iv) Return keyword set {࢏࢝} and concept space set {ܑ܅ } for all ࢔ . 
4. Extract keyword set related to ۾and corresponding concept space set: 
{࢏࢝}, {ܑ܅ } = Pipeline (۾ ,૚)  for all ૚ 
5. Extract keyword set related to each ܑ܅ and corresponding concept space set: 
{࢐࢏࢝}, {ܒ܅ } = Pipeline (ܑ܅  ,૛)  for all i = 1, 2, …, ૚and  ૛ 
6. Find new concept space related to keywords ࢏࢝and ࢐࢏࢝for all ૚ and  =࢐
૛) but not related to ࢖ :
• {࢏࢝}, {ܑ܅ } = Pipeline (܋۾ ,૚)  for all ૚ 
• {࢐࢏࢝}, {ܒ܅ } = Pipeline (ܑ܅  ,૛)  for all i = 1, 2, …, ૚and  ࢐= 
૛ 
4. Experimental Setting 
For solving a real business problem, the proposed method is used to identify customers’ unmet 
needs for home appliances. Target home appliances are refrigerator, washing machine, robot cleaner, 
Figure 5. Expanding the concept space of the target product. (a) The concept space P is expanded to P′.
(b) Shaded spaces can be regarded as evidence for the customer’s unmet needs and the new function of
the target product.
The HSCS Algorithm 1 described so far is summarized below.

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 10 of 20
Table 3. Hierarchical Search of Concept Spaces (HSCS) algorithm.
Algorithm 1: Hierarchical Search of Concept Spaces (HSCS)
1. Determine the primal keyword p
2. Extract documents including p. Assign this corpus to concept space P.
3. Deﬁne the function named Pipeline (input_space = I, number_of_keywords = n):
(i) Preprocess the corpus in I (tokenizing → POS tagging→ stemming and lemmatizing→
Processing slang or jargon).
(ii) Sort words by frequency in descending order and determine the top- words wi (i = 1, 2, . . ., n).
(iii) Extract documents including wi. Assign this corpus to each concept space P∩ Wi.
(iv) Return keyword set {wi} and concept space set{I∩ Wi} for all i = 1, 2, . . ., n.
4. Extract keyword set related to P and corresponding concept space set:
{wi}, P∩ Wi = Pipeline(P, n1) for all i = 1, 2, . . ., n1
5. Extract keyword set related to each P∩ Wi and corresponding concept space set:
{
wij
}
,
{
P∩ Wi∩ Wj = Pipeline(P∩ Wi, n2) for all i = 1, 2, . . ., n1 and j = 1, 2, . . ., n2
6. Find new concept space related to keywords wi and wi j (for all i = 1, 2, . . ., n1 and j = 1, 2, . . ., n2) but
not related to p:
• {wi},{Pc∩ Wi = Pipeline (Pc, n1) for all i = 1, 2, . . ., n1
•
{
wij
}
,
{
P∩ Wi∩ Wj = Pipeline(P∩ Wi, n2) for all i = 1, 2, . . ., n1 and j = 1, 2, . . ., n2
4. Experimental Setting
For solving a real business problem, the proposed method is used to identify customers’ unmet
needs for home appliances. Target home appliances are refrigerator, washing machine, robot cleaner,
air conditioner, and oven. Based on identiﬁed customer needs and user contexts, several user scenarios
are established for developing new functions of target products.
4.1. Background
Many companies have tried to develop new functions of the product based on exchanging
information between smartphones and home appliances. In many cases, rather than considering
customer-perceived values ﬁrst, user scenarios based on available technologies and methodologies have
been created. However, since these technology-speciﬁc scenarios are not from the user, the utility of the
users is unknown. For example, if a company has a good voice recognition technology, product features
can be developed to take full advantage of that technology. In this case, if the experience of customers
who use the functions of the product is not su ﬃciently taken into consideration, the possibility of
introducing a new product that is diﬀerent from the user’s needs of the market increases.
To develop a function that ﬁts the user’s experience, it is important to create a scenario that fully
reﬂects the user’s experience and needs that occur during the actual user’s use of the target product.
The eﬃcient and eﬀective NPD process is achieved by considering technology and user interface
(UI), reﬂecting the user-friendly scenario in the early stage of product development. In the preceding
example, it is diﬃcult to make a smart product by speech recognition technology alone. If users are
unspeciﬁed, it is necessary to concentrate on creating speech recognition technology robust to users’
accent and their surrounding noise. Besides, depending on whether it is important for the question
and answer process to proceed smoothly and how it is important to form a bond with the user through
dialogue with the virtual bots, the technology required to create an artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) model
will change, and the model itself will be diﬀerent.

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 11 of 20
Therefore, this study intends to develop a new function of smart home appliances from the
viewpoint of user-centered design rather than technology-centered design. To achieve this goal,
customers’ unmet needs (or user contexts) for ﬁve home appliances are derived from online social
media using the Context Tree.
4.2. Online Social Media Data and Processing T ool
Targeted online social media data consists of Korean tweets and blog posts on Naver.com,
which is the biggest web portal in South Korea, containing several words representing previous target
products. The tweets and blog posts used in the analysis were generated between May 2012 and
April 2013. Because application programming interfaces (APIs) provided by Twitter and Korean web
portals provide a limited number of data acquisitions, a web-based tool named ‘SOCIAL Metrics’
(http://socialmetrics.co.kr), which has already collected all tweets and blog posts through strategic
alliances with online social media platforms, is used to prove the proposed method. SOCIAL Metrics
was developed by DaumSoft, which is one of the leading social media [11]. SOCIAL Metrics parses all
texts and converts them into words using a Korean natural language processing tool and normalized
vocabulary developed in-house. Using this tool and database, the frequency of keywords and
co-occurrence between keywords are calculated. Figure 6 illustrates the structure of SOCIAL Metrics.
It derives related keywords with high co-occurrence by searching the words as queries.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 20 
air conditioner, and oven. Based on identified customer needs and user contexts, several user 
scenarios are established for developing new functions of target products. 
4.1. Background 
Many companies have tried to develop new fu nctions of the product based on exchanging 
information between smartphones and home applianc es. In many cases, rather than considering 
customer-perceived values first, user scenarios ba sed on available technologies and methodologies 
have been created. However, since these technology-specific scenarios are not from the user, the 
utility of the users is unknown. For example, if a company has a good voice recognition technology, 
product features can be developed to take full ad vantage of that technology . In this case, if the 
experience of customers who use the functions of the product is not sufficiently taken into 
consideration, the possibility of introducing a new product that is different from the user’s needs of 
the market increases. 
To develop a function that fits the user’s experience, it is important to create a scenario that fully 
reflects the user’s experience and needs that occur during the actual user’s use of the target product. 
The efficient and effective NPD process is achieved by considering technology and user interface (UI), 
reflecting the user-friendly scenario in the early stage of product development. In the preceding 
example, it is difficult to make a smart product by  speech recognition technology alone. If users are 
unspecified, it is necessary to concentrate on creating speech recognition technology robust to users’ 
accent and their surrounding noise. Besides, depend ing on whether it is important for the question 
and answer process to proceed smoothly and how it is important to form a bond with the user 
through dialogue with the virtual bots, the technology required to create an artificial intelligence (AI) 
model will change, and the model itself will be different. 
Therefore, this study intends to develop a new function of smart home appliances from the 
viewpoint of user-centered design rather than te chnology-centered design. To achieve this goal, 
customers’ unmet needs (or user contexts) for five home appliances are derived from online social 
media using the Context Tree. 
4.2. Online Social Media Data and Processing Tool 
Targeted online social media data consists of Korean tweets and blog posts on Naver.com, which 
is the biggest web portal in South Korea, contai ning several words representing previous target 
products. The tweets and blog posts used in the analysis were generated between May 2012 and April 
2013. Because application programming interfaces (APIs) provided by Twitter and Korean web 
portals provide a limited number of data acquis itions, a web-based tool named ‘SOCIAL Metrics’ 
(http://socialmetrics.co.kr), which has already coll ected all tweets and blog posts through strategic 
alliances with online social media platforms, is used to prove the proposed method. SOCIAL Metrics 
was developed by DaumSoft, which is one of the leading social media [11]. SOCIAL Metrics parses 
all texts and converts them into words using a Korean natural language processing tool and 
normalized vocabulary developed in-house. Using this tool and database, the frequency of keywords 
and co-occurrence between keywords are calculated.  Figure 6 illustrates the structure of SOCIAL 
Metrics. It derives related keywords with high co-occurrence by searching the words as queries. 
 
Figure 6. SOCIAL Metrics for searching tweets and blog posts.
5. Results
5.1. Applying the HSCS Algorithm to Online Social Media Data
The target products are ﬁve home appliances. This section describes an example that identiﬁes
customers’ unmet needs for ‘oven’, which is one of the target products, from online social media.
In this case, the primal keyword p is ‘oven’. Tweets and blog posts containingp are collected to
make the concept space P. This concept space is identical to the root node of the concept tree. As a
result, 100,000 tweets and blog posts are found. After that, keywords related to p are determined.
They are the top-k words that appear frequently in the concept space P. Several concept spaces P∩ Wi
(for i = 1, 2, . . ., k) are branched out from the root node of the concept tree. The result is described in
Table 4.
Users’ contexts related to the primal keyword ‘oven’ and its related keywords are extracted by
document clustering and frequently appeared words. For example, in the concept space with ‘oven’
and ‘fail’, there are many tweets that say that if you cook in the oven, you would fail. Besides, words
like ‘usually’, ‘again’ are frequently appeared in that concept space. As a result, the user’s context
named ‘usually fails to cook with oven’ is found, as shown in Figure 7.

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 12 of 20
Table 4. Keywords related to ‘oven’ and corresponding user contexts.
Related Keywords Term Frequency Discovered User Contexts
Taste 66,455
• Food made with the oven is usually delicious
• New way of cooking by oven usually fails
Home 57,300
• Do not know how to cook with an oven
• Many people want to cook diverse cuisines, but they do
not have any oven
Kids 36,078
• Make a snack for the child using the oven
• Oven should be kept out of reach of children
Snack 26,082
• Want to make healthy snacks with the oven
• Cooking snacks with the oven is sometimes tiresome
Mother 21,254
• Although my mom has the oven, she doesn’t cook foods
with the oven
Fail 2895 • Usually fails to cook with the oven
Troublesome 269
• More troublesome to cook with oven than microwave or
gas stove
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 20 
 
Figure 7. Tweets and discovered context in the concept space with ‘oven’ and ‘fail’. 
It is found out that many people want to make healthy breads and snacks for their family. In the next 
step, tweets and blog posts, which do not contain the primal keyword ‘oven’ and contain keywords 
like ‘bread’, ‘snack’, ‘baking’ related to the primal keyword, are collected. By exploring the data, the 
following users’ contexts are discovered: 
• Recipe is particularly important in baking. 
• The main reason that baking fails is that many people make a mistake in the process of the recipe, 
such as not well controlled preheat temperature. 
• I want to make snacks with healthy and good ingredients for my kids. 
• I want to make healthy snacks for children, but I do not know what snacks to make. 
The Context Tree of ‘oven’ is constructed based on these users’ contexts, illustrated in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. Context Tree for the primal keyword ‘oven’. 
5.2. Developing User Scenarios 
After identifying customers’ needs from social media, it is necessary to create users’ scenarios in 
the same way as existing NPD processes. For this purpose, a task force team is made to create 
Figure 7. Tweets and discovered context in the concept space with ‘oven’ and ‘fail’.
It is found out that many people want to make healthy breads and snacks for their family. In the
next step, tweets and blog posts, which do not contain the primal keyword ‘oven’ and contain keywords
like ‘bread’, ‘snack’, ‘baking’ related to the primal keyword, are collected. By exploring the data,
the following users’ contexts are discovered:
• Recipe is particularly important in baking.
• The main reason that baking fails is that many people make a mistake in the process of the recipe,
such as not well controlled preheat temperature.
• I want to make snacks with healthy and good ingredients for my kids.
• I want to make healthy snacks for children, but I do not know what snacks to make.

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 13 of 20
The Context Tree of ‘oven’ is constructed based on these users’ contexts, illustrated in Figure 8.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 20 
 
Figure 7. Tweets and discovered context in the concept space with ‘oven’ and ‘fail’. 
It is found out that many people want to make healthy breads and snacks for their family. In the next 
step, tweets and blog posts, which do not contain the primal keyword ‘oven’ and contain keywords 
like ‘bread’, ‘snack’, ‘baking’ related to the primal keyword, are collected. By exploring the data, the 
following users’ contexts are discovered: 
• Recipe is particularly important in baking. 
• The main reason that baking fails is that many people make a mistake in the process of the recipe, 
such as not well controlled preheat temperature. 
• I want to make snacks with healthy and good ingredients for my kids. 
• I want to make healthy snacks for children, but I do not know what snacks to make. 
The Context Tree of ‘oven’ is constructed based on these users’ contexts, illustrated in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. Context Tree for the primal keyword ‘oven’. 
5.2. Developing User Scenarios 
After identifying customers’ needs from social media, it is necessary to create users’ scenarios in 
the same way as existing NPD processes. For this purpose, a task force team is made to create 
Figure 8. Context Tree for the primal keyword ‘oven’.
5.2. Developing User Scenarios
After identifying customers’ needs from social media, it is necessary to create users’ scenarios
in the same way as existing NPD processes. For this purpose, a task force team is made to create
scenarios based on the Context Tree. The team consists of product managers, engineers, market
researchers, and (potential) customers. The team focuses on users’ pain points and corresponding
solutions. Besides, the team does a lot of discussion about whether solutions are feasible and product
speciﬁcations and price are appropriate for the customer.
As a result, ﬁve user scenarios for each target appliance are created. In this paper, one user
scenario for a smart oven, named ‘Oven never fail to cook’, is described in detail. In the Context Tree
of the oven described above, many customers want to make healthy foods, snacks, and breads with the
oven. Besides, there is a strong sense that it is di ﬃcult to cook something with the oven. To satisfy
these users’ contexts, the system where the oven manufacturer directly manages the recipes using its
oven is proposed.
The scenario ‘Oven never fail to cook!’ is illustrated in Figure 9. The details of the scenario are
as follows:
• Send recipes to oven online: Each oven has di ﬀerent product speciﬁcations, such as power
consumption, space size, and temperature rise rate. For this reason, even with the same recipe,
the result may vary depending on the oven. Thus, if the oven manufacturer manages detailed
recipes that can make some foods using their own oven, consumers can receive a great deal of
convenience. If the recipes are passed to the oven as eXtensible Markup Language (XML)—like data
that is easy to parse, it will be possible for the oven to automatically adjust the temperature and
heating time to the recipe.
• Automatic settings are made for cooking: The schedule of the main settings is automatically
set. In addition, it transmits to the user a voice when the user inserts additional ingredients or
subtracts the dish.

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 14 of 20
• Oven can interact with the user: There can be several interactions between the oven and its user.
For example, if the food in the oven is overcooked and smoked, it will promptly notify the user to
stop the operation or take out the food quickly. If the oven can detect a user’s mistake in terms of
the recipe, it may be able to tell the user about the solution.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 20 
scenarios based on the Context Tree. The team co nsists of product managers, engineers, market 
researchers, and (potential) customers. The team focuses on users’ pain points and corresponding 
solutions. Besides, the team does a lot of discussion about whether solutions are feasible and product 
specifications and price are appropriate for the customer. 
As a result, five user scenarios for each target appliance are created. In this paper, one user 
scenario for a smart oven, named ‘Oven never fail to cook’, is described in detail. In the Context Tree 
of the oven described above, many customers want to make healthy foods, snacks, and breads with 
the oven. Besides, there is a strong sense that it is difficult to cook something with the oven. To satisfy 
these users’ contexts, the system where the oven manufacturer directly manages the recipes using its 
oven is proposed. 
The scenario ‘Oven never fail to cook!’ is illustrated in Figure 9. The details of the scenario are 
as follows: 
• Send recipes to oven online: Each oven has different product specifications, such as power 
consumption, space size, and temperature rise rate. For this reason, even with the same recipe, 
the result may vary depending on the oven. Th us, if the oven manufacturer manages detailed 
recipes that can make some foods using their ow n oven, consumers can receive a great deal of 
convenience. If the recipes are passed to the oven as eXtensible Markup Language (XML)—like 
data that is easy to parse, it will be possible for the oven to automatically adjust the temperature 
and heating time to the recipe. 
• Automatic settings are made for cooking: The schedule of the main settings is automatically set. 
In addition, it transmits to the user a voice wh en the user inserts additional ingredients or 
subtracts the dish. 
• Oven can interact with the user: There can be several interactions between the oven and its user. 
For example, if the food in the oven is overcooked and smoked, it will promptly notify the user 
to stop the operation or take out the food quickly. If the oven can detect a user’s mistake in terms 
of the recipe, it may be able to tell the user about the solution. 
 
Figure 9. An example scenario of oven: ‘Oven never fails to cook!’. 
The users’ contexts targeted by this scenario is highlighted in the Context Tree, like in Figure 10. 
Figure 9. An example scenario of oven: ‘Oven never fails to cook!’.
The users’ contexts targeted by this scenario is highlighted in the Context Tree, like in Figure 10.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 20 
 
Figure 10. User contexts targeted by scenario ‘Oven never fail to cook!’ 
In this manner, there are 18 user scenarios for satisfying customers’ needs and users’ contexts. 
Some of these scenarios are currently being implemented as new functions in home appliances. These 
scenarios are listed in Table 5. 
Table 5. Scenarios for 5 home appliances. 
Product Scenarios 
Robot cleaner 
Recognizing of obstacles 
Recognizing and informing dirty place 
Customizing schedule of cleaning 
Recognizing and informing home condition (temperature, illumination, humidity, etc.) 
Air conditioner Recognizing the usual on/off pattern 
Informing the temperature around the air conditioner 
Oven 
Informing the optimized recipe for the oven  
(Subtitle: ‘Oven never fail to cook’) 
Informing the recipe according to the cooking level of a user 
Recommending the recipe according to context 
Observing food through the camera in the oven 
Refrigerator 
Informing where to clean 
Informing what kinds of food is insufficient 
Managing the temperature of a refrigerator 
Informing the effective method to store and manage food 
Mini-refrigerator 
Reducing the noise of the refrigerator 
Washing machine Informing the best day to do laundry 
Informing where to dry laundry 
6. Discussion 
6.1. Which is Right for Identifying Customer Needs: Tweets, Blog Posts, and Other Alternatives 
The data used in this study are tweets and blog p o s t s .  A s  c o m p a r i n g  t h e  t w o ,  i t  i s  e a s i e r  t o  
identify the keyword-based user contexts about ho me appliances using tweets than blog posts. A 
single tweet is a short sentence within 140 characters (not strict criteria), while a blog post is long and 
Figure 10. User contexts targeted by scenario ‘Oven never fail to cook!’
In this manner, there are 18 user scenarios for satisfying customers’ needs and users’ contexts.
Some of these scenarios are currently being implemented as new functions in home appliances.
These scenarios are listed in Table 5.

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 15 of 20
Table 5. Scenarios for 5 home appliances.
Product Scenarios
Robot cleaner
Recognizing of obstacles
Recognizing and informing dirty place
Customizing schedule of cleaning
Recognizing and informing home condition (temperature, illumination, humidity, etc.)
Air conditioner Recognizing the usual on/oﬀ pattern
Informing the temperature around the air conditioner
Oven
Informing the optimized recipe for the oven
(Subtitle: ‘Oven never fail to cook’)
Informing the recipe according to the cooking level of a user
Recommending the recipe according to context
Observing food through the camera in the oven
Refrigerator
Informing where to clean
Informing what kinds of food is insuﬃcient
Managing the temperature of a refrigerator
Informing the eﬀective method to store and manage food
Mini-refrigerator
Reducing the noise of the refrigerator
Washing machine Informing the best day to do laundry
Informing where to dry laundry
6. Discussion
6.1. Which Is Right for Identifying Customer Needs: Tweets, Blog Posts, and Other Alternatives
The data used in this study are tweets and blog posts. As comparing the two, it is easier to identify
the keyword-based user contexts about home appliances using tweets than blog posts. A single tweet
is a short sentence within 140 characters (not strict criteria), while a blog post is long and contains
a lot of nested topics compared to tweets. For example, when the word ‘oven’ appears on a tweet,
the subject of the tweet is often highly related to the ‘oven’. On the other hand, even though the word
‘oven’ is included in a blog post, the main topic of that blog post may be the daily record or house
interior, which are not signiﬁcantly related to the oven.
Of course, the above example is not always true. For some subjects, there may be many posts
that deal with them in detail, and even the average length of those posts is long. It is a good idea to
check whether our target social media data is proper to extract users’ contexts through preliminary
analysis. However, if you do not have much time to collect and analyze all types of data, it is strongly
recommended to use short texts, such as tweets, product reviews, etc.
Except for tweets and blog posts, some websites and applications that deal with speciﬁc topics
in-depth are good for extracting users’ contexts and identifying customers’ needs. These types of
websites and applications include:
• Yelp: reviews on restaurants and dishes
• Amazon: reviews on many products (in speciﬁc categories related to target subjects)
• IMDB and Rotten Tomatoes: reviews on movies and TV shows
• Yahoo Answer: questions and corresponding answers about target subjects
• Reddit: Opinions on target subjects
6.2. Comparison between the Proposed Method and Conventional Methods for Identifying Customers’ Needs
In this section, the proposed method is compared with other methods in various aspects.

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 16 of 20
6.2.1. Sample Size and Sample Bias
In terms of sample size, the proposed framework is much stronger than conventional methods.
The number of social media users is huge, so it is easy to gather various opinions on social media.
With respect to sample bias, the proposed framework also has advantages and disadvantages. First,
because the number of social media users is huge, there is little bias towards the small sample size.
However, social media users may be biased toward age or sex. For example, it is not easy to get the
opinions of older people with online social media. This bias is di ﬃcult to control for researchers.
Therefore, it is a good idea to select proper subjects to utilize social media data.
6.2.2. The Direction of Discovering User Context
The proposed methodology starts from a broad concept space and reaches narrow concept spaces
by extending the Context Tree. It means that the proposed framework ﬁnds customer needs in the
direction of speciﬁc concept space in general concept space. On the other hand, conventional methods
try to derive several contexts from a small number of samples and generalize them.
It is important to consider this di ﬀerence between the proposed framework and conventional
methods. If you need to track a user’s experience for a long time, it is not desirable to use social media
data. In this case, the Day Reconstruction Method (DRM) [ 42] is suitable for researchers to observe
users of the target product for a certain period. The use of social media data has the advantage of being
able to draw the user’s experience from many people. Besides, it does not convey the intent of the
researcher to people, so it is expected to obtain a more vivid, unﬁltered experience.
6.2.3. Cost and Reusability
The proposed methodology requires a lot of costs. It requires an infrastructure to collect and
store social media data. In addition, some software programs are needed to develop, such as a natural
language processing toolkit for languages, which appear in the collected data, and a data exploration
tool for researchers. Therefore, the proposed framework can be more expensive than other methods.
However, once such a system is prepared, it is possible to easily extract the users’ contexts for any
subject. Although the initial investment cost is high, it has a great advantage in terms of reusability.
6.2.4. Easier to Implement than Machine Learning-Based Topic Modeling Methods
To ﬁnd the context, machine learning-based topic model methods, including latent semantic
analysis (LSA) and latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA), or clustering methods, including k-means
clustering, may be employed. However, these mathematical and statistical approaches require
extrapolations of analysts’ subjectivity to use latent dimensions or cluster centroid vectors in product
development, and it is diﬃcult to control good quality contexts via an algorithm. LSA and LDA extract
latent vectors, also known as topic vectors, which are related to words. Each latent vector does not
represent a single topic that humans can understand. After extracting the latent vector, the human must
interpret and label it by looking at the related words and corresponding weights. Generally, this process
is very subjective, and there is no guarantee that you can label with a clear topic. Therefore, deriving
ideas for new products, which is this study’s goal, using machine learning-based topic model methods
is likely to fail. Furthermore, LSA and LDA have several hyperparameters, which should be controlled
for good performance. Especially, LDA is hard to determine the number of topics beforehand [33].
The clustering algorithm, one of the unsupervised machine learning methods, is also diﬃcult to
achieve our research purpose in the same context. By clustering documents, several cluster centroid
vectors are derived, and they can be considered as the main topics. However, interpreting cluster
centroid vectors is also not easy. Besides, it is diﬃcult to produce good clustering results depending on
the data.
To prevent this problem, this study employed a method that identiﬁed the user’s context from the
corresponding concept space based on the extracted related keywords. Extracting users’ contexts using

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 17 of 20
related keywords has advantages of not only convenient expert interpretation but also quantitative
evaluation through the frequency of keywords that respond to the corresponding context. In addition,
the proposed method is more suitable for NPD as it is more focused on the purpose of targeting the
unmet needs of customers.
6.3. Criteria for Extracting Related Keywords
In the previous case study, term frequency is one of the criteria for extracting related keywords.
In fact, three criteria for extracting keywords can be considered. The ﬁrst criterion is the frequency
of words. This is a way of preprocessing target texts and considering frequently appearing words
as relevant keywords. The second one is the degree of di ﬀusion. It means that many propagated
articles are important. The third one is the rating of domain experts and researchers. They can select
texts by their own knowledge. To prove out concepts, the article sets constructed by combinations
of the above selection criteria are compared. Fifty tweets and 50 blog posts are included in each set.
Fifteen non-experts and ﬁve experts are involved in the evaluation of these sets. They score how
relevant corresponding articles are to the problem of identifying customer needs. A 10-point scale is
used for scoring. The result of this experiment is shown in the following Table 6. Considering the
frequency of words and rating of experts is the best scored.
Table 6. Evaluation of criteria combinations for extracting keywords.
Combinations of Criteria Average Score
Non-experts Experts Total
Frequency of words (F) 5.27 5.6 5.3525
Degree of diﬀusion (D) 5.07 3.6 4.7025
Rating of experts and researchers (R) 6.47 7.4 6.7025
F + D 5.6 6.2 5.75
F + R 7 8.8 7.45
D + R 6.4 6.8 6.5
F + D + R 6.27 7.8 6.6525
7. Conclusions
In this paper, the Context Tree is proposed as a new approach to identifying signiﬁcant customers’
unmet needs from online social media. The Context Tree consists of the primal keyword, its related
keywords, and concept spaces. Each node of the Context Tree has a representative keyword and
a corresponding concept space. So, the Context Tree is useful for structurally exploring the users’
experience and context for the target product with respect to NPD. Besides, the proposed HSCS
algorithm goes beyond simply searching for related keywords and identify the basis and evidence
for customers’ unmet needs. Therefore, this basis can be used to derive ideas for designing new
functions or speciﬁcations for the target product, which is foremost in the NPD process. With the
case study, users’ contexts on ﬁve home appliances are identiﬁed using the Context Tree based on the
HSCS algorithm. These contexts are used as sources to create users’ scenarios for new functions and
speciﬁcations of the target appliances.
The main contribution of the Context Tree with HSCS algorithm is that the proposed method
presented a way of utilizing online social media data, focusing on idea and concept screening stages in
the early stages of the NPD process. According to [5], the idea screening stage and concept screening
stage are critical to orienting the new product. The proposed method seeks not only the current
user’s experience of using the target product but also the context in which the product is not being
used to ﬁnd the basis for unmet needs. As a result of a case study for home appliances, including
the oven, users’ scenarios for the use of new products are successfully designed using evidence for
customers’ unmet needs identiﬁed by the Context Tree. Besides, as mentioned in previous sessions,
the Context Tree with HSCS algorithm is not parametric, so it can be applied to big data to easily derive

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 18 of 20
results. In addition, the derived result is composed of structural keywords and context, which has the
advantage of easy interpretation.
However, the proposed approach has some limitations because it still requires human eﬀort to
make ideas for new functions and speciﬁcations of a new product from the Context Tree. Besides,
the process of extracting the users’ context may be subjective. Obviously, it would be necessary for
the data analyst to participate in ﬁnding out which topics are contained in the corpus containing
keywords. In this case, the keyword structure can help you. For example, suppose that the primal
keyword is ‘oven’. After applying the pipeline to the corpus containing the primal keyword ‘oven’,
it is found out that ‘snack’ is the most frequent word. By executing pipelines, suppose that the words
‘healthy’, ‘mom’, and ‘cookie’ come up frequently in the corpus containing ‘snack’. I can combine these
keywords to extract the users’ context, like “Mom usually wants to make a healthy cookie using the
oven for her children”. The process of extracting the users’ context may be subjective, but the materials,
such as frequent keywords and the keyword structure used in the process, are objective through Big
Data analysis. This is the biggest diﬀerence between conventional methods and the proposed method.
However, it is important to reduce the user’s involvement in the above process. Reducing the user’s
involvement will require further reﬁnement of algorithms and analytical techniques.
One of the future works is to make users’ contexts intelligently. In this study, users’ contexts are
described by keywords and not using intelligent algorithms, such as matrix decomposition algorithms
and clustering algorithms. There is a possibility that a person’s subjectivity will intervene when that
person views the keyword table and make contexts. Although the result of topic modeling methods like
LSA, LDA, and clustering algorithms can be diﬃcult to interpret, they have a strength in minimizing
subjective intervention. Therefore, if a topic modeling algorithm with high interpretability is developed
and applied to the Context Tree, it is possible to extract the user’s experience and context that can be
more objectiﬁed.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization: M.H.Y. and S.C.; methodology, T.K. and I.R.; software, T.K.;
validation, I.R.; formal analysis, T.K.; investigation, I.R.; resources, M.H.Y. and S.C.; data curation, T.K. and
I.R.; writing—original draft preparation, T.K.; writing—review and editing, T.K. and I.R.; visualization, T.K.;
supervision, S.C.; project administration, T.K.; funding acquisition, M.H.Y. and S.C. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The article publishing charge is funded by a grant of the Korea Health Technology R&D Project
through the Korea Health Industry Development Institute (KHIDI), funded by the Ministry of Health & Welfare,
South Korea (grant number: HE20C0029).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Norman, D.A.; Draper, S.W.User Centered System Design: New Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction ,
1st ed.; Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.: Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 1986.
2. Ulrich, K.T.; Eppinger, S.D.; Yang, M.S.Product Design and Development , 7th ed.; McGraw-Hill Education:
New York, NY, USA, 2019.
3. Cooper, G.C. The Drivers of Success in New-Product Development. Ind. Mark. Manag. 2019, 76, 36–47.
[CrossRef]
4. Gri ﬃn, A.; Hauser, J.R. The voice of the customer. Mark. Sci. 1993, 12, 1–27. [CrossRef]
5. Hart, S.; Hultink, E.J.; Tzokas, N.; Commandeur, H.R. Industrial Companies’ Evaluation Criteria in New
Product Development Gates. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 2003, 20, 22–36. [CrossRef]
6. Girota, K.; Terwiesch, C.; Ulrich, K.T. Idea Generation and the Quality of the Best Idea. Manag. Sci. 2010,
56, 591–605.
7. Goﬃn, K.; Varnes, C.J.; Hoven, C.; Koners, U. Beyond the Voice of Customer: Ethnographic Market Research.
Res. T echnol. Manag. 2012, 55, 45–53. [CrossRef]
8. Kinnear, T.C.; Taylor, J.R. Marketing Research: An Applied Approach ; Subsequent Edition; McGraw-Hill
Education: New York, NY, USA, 1996.

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 19 of 20
9. Vredenburg, K.; Mao, J.-Y.; Smith, P .W.; Carey, T. A Survey of User-centered Design Practice. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Minneapolis, MI, USA, 20–25 April 2002;
Association of Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA; pp. 471–478.
10. Sekaran, U.; Bougie, R. Research Methods for Business: A Skill Building Approach , 7th ed.; John Wiley & Sons:
Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2020.
11. Rhiu, I.; Yun, M.H. Exploring User Experience of Smartphones in Social Media: A Mixed-Method Analysis.
Hum. Comput. Interact. 2018, 34, 960–969. [CrossRef]
12. Gable, G.G. Integrating Case Study and Survey Research Methods: An Example in Information Systems.
Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 1994, 3, 112–126. [CrossRef]
13. Timoshenko, A.; Hause, J.R. Identifying Customer Needs from User-Generated Content. Mark. Sci. 2019,
38, 1–20. [CrossRef]
14. Noordhuis, P .; Heijkoop, M.; Lazovik, A. Mining Twitter in the Cloud: A Case Study. In Proceedings of
the 2010 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Cloud Computing, Miami, FL, USA, 5–10 July 2010; IEEE:
New York, NY, USA; pp. 107–114.
15. Dai, M.; He, W.; Tian, X.; Giraldi, A.; Gu, F. Working with Communities on Social Media: Varieties in the Use
of Facebook and Twitter by Local Police. Online Inf. Rev. 2017, 41, 782–796. [CrossRef]
16. Manigold, W.G.; Faulds, D.J. Social Media: The New Hybrid Element of the Promotion Mix. Bus. Horiz.
2009, 52, 357–365. [CrossRef]
17. Baum, D.; Füller, J.; Pedit, T. Social Media Campaigns for New Product Introduction. In Proceedings of the
21st European Conference on Information Systems, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 6–8 July 2013; Association for
Information Systems: Atlanta, GA, USA; pp. 1–12.
18. Schivinski, B.; Dabrowski, D. The Eﬀect of Social Media Communication on Consumer Perceptions of Brands.
J. Mark. Commun. 2016, 22, 189–214. [CrossRef]
19. Tuarob, S.; Tucker, C.S. Quantifying Product Favorability and Extracting Notable Product Features Using
Large Scale Social Media Data. J. Comput. Inf. Sci. Eng. 2015, 15, 031003. [CrossRef]
20. Adida, C.; Gottlieb, J.; Kramon, E.; McClendon, G. Response Bias in Survey Measures of Voter Behavior:
Implications for Measurement and Inference. J. Exp. Political Sci. 2019, 6, 192–198. [CrossRef]
21. Trott, P . The Role of Market Research in the Development of Discontinuous New Products.Eur. J. Innov. Manag.
2001, 4, 117–126. [CrossRef]
22. Witell, L.; Kristensson, P .; Gustafsson, A.; Löfgren, M. Idea Generation: Customer Co-creation versus
Traditional Market Search Techniques. J. Serv. Manag. 2011, 22, 140–159. [CrossRef]
23. Verma, R.; Anderson, C.; Dixon, M.; Enz, C.A.; Thompson, G.; Victorino, L. Key Elements in Service
Innovation: Insights for the Hospitality Industry. In Proceedings of the Cornell Hospitality Roundtable,
Ithaca, NY, USA, 1 November 2008; Cornell University: Ithaca, NY, USA; pp. 6–12.
24. Poetz, M.K.; Schreier, M. The Value of Crowdsourcing: Can Users Really Compete with Professionals in
Generating New Product Ideas? J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 2012, 29, 245–256. [CrossRef]
25. Bayus, B.L. Crowdsourcing New Product Ideas over Time: An Analysis of the Dell IdeaStorm Community.
Manag. Sci. 2013, 49, 226–244. [CrossRef]
26. Kim, A.J.; Ko, E. Do Social Media Marketing Activities Enhance Customer Equity? An Empirical Study of
Luxury Fashion Brand. J. Bus. Res. 2012, 65, 1480–1486. [CrossRef]
27. Saha, A.; Sindhwani, V . Learning Evolving and Emerging Topics in Social Media: A Dynamic NMF Approach
with Temporal Regularization. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM International Conference on Web Search and
Data Mining, Seattle, WA, USA, 8–12 February 2012; Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY,
USA; pp. 693–702.
28. McAuley, J.; Leskovic, J. Hidden Factors and Hidden Topics: Understanding Rating Dimensions with
Review Text. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, Hong Kong, China,
12–16 October 2013; Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA; pp. 165–172.
29. Tuarob, S.; Tucker, C.S. Fad or Here to Stay: Predicting Product Market Adoption and Longevity Using
Large Scale, Social Media Data. In Proceedings of the ASME 2013 International Design Engineering
Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference, Portland, OR, USA,
4–7 August 2013; The American Society of Mechanical Engineers: New York, NY, USA; p. V02BT02A012.
30. Ko, N.; Jeong, B.; Choi, S.; Yoon, J. Identifying Product Opportunities Using Social Media Mining: Application
of Topic Modeling and Chance Discovery Theory. IEEE Access. 2017, 6, 1680–1693. [CrossRef]

===PAGE BREAK===

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8473 20 of 20
31. Kühl, N.; Goutier, M.; Ensslen, A.; Jochem, P . Literature vs. Twitter: Empirical Insights on Customer Needs
in E-mobility. J. Clean. Prod. 2019, 213, 508–520. [CrossRef]
32. Jeong, B.; Yoon, J.; Lee, J.-M. Social Media Mining for Product Planning: A Product Opportunity Mining
Approach based on Topic Modeling and Sentiment Analysis. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2019, 48, 280–290. [CrossRef]
33. Reisenbichler, M.; Reutterer, T. Topic Modeling in Marketing: Recent Advances and Research Opportunities.
J. Bus. Econ. 2019, 89, 327–356. [CrossRef]
34. Kim, W.; Ko, T.; Rhiu, I.; Yun, M.H. Mining Aﬀective Experience for a Kansei Design Study on a Recliner.
Appl. Ergon. 2019, 74, 145–153.
35. Joung, J.; Jung, K.; Ko, S.; Kim, K. Customer Complaints Analysis Using Text Mining and Outcome-Driven
Innovation Method for Market-Oriented Product Development. Sustainability 2019, 11, 40. [CrossRef]
36. He, W.; Zhang, W.; Tian, X.; Tao, R.; Akula, V . Identifying Customer Knowledge on Social Media through
Data Analytics. J. Enterp. Inf. Manag. 2019, 32, 152–169. [CrossRef]
37. Lomborg, S.; Bechmann, A. Using APIs for Data Collection on Social Media. Inf. Soc. 2014, 30, 256–265.
[CrossRef]
38. Sun, S.; Luo, C.; Chen, J. A Review of Natural Language Processing Techniques for Opinion Mining Systems.
Inf. Fusion. 2017, 36, 10–25. [CrossRef]
39. Toman, M.; Jezek, K. Inﬂuence of Word Normalization on Text Classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 1st
International Conference on Multidisciplinary Information Sciences and Technologies, Merida, Spain,
25–28 October 2006; pp. 354–358.
40. Manning, C.; Schutze, H.Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Process, 1st ed.; The MIT Press: Cambridge,
MA, USA, 1999; pp. 131–147.
41. Mostafa, M.M. More Than Words: Social Network’s Text Mining for Consumer Brand Sentiments.
Expert Syst. Appl. 2013, 40, 4241–4251. [CrossRef]
42. Forlizzi, J. How Robotic Products Become Social Products: An Ethnographic Study of Cleaning in the Home.
In Proceedings of the 2007 2nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI),
Arlington, VA, USA, 9–11 March 2007; IEEE: New York, NY, USA; pp. 129–136.
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
aﬃliations.
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).