Article
Charting the Path to Purchase Using
Topic Models
Hongshuang (Alice) Li and Liye Ma
Abstract
In gathering information for an intended purchase decision, consumers submit search phrases to online search engines. These
search phrases directly express the consumers’ needs in their own words and thus provide valuable information to marketing
managers. Interpreting consumers’ search phrases renders a better understanding of their purchase intentions, which is critical
for marketing success. In this article, the authors develop an integrated model to connect the latent topics embedded in con-
sumers’ search phrases to their website visits and purchase decisions. Using a unique data set containing more than 8,000 search
phrases submitted by consumers, the model identifies latent topics underlying the searches that led consumers to the firm’s
website. Compared with a model lacking any textual information from consumers’ search phrases, a model using textual data in a
heuristic approach, and a model based on the latent Dirichlet allocation, the proposed model provides a better evaluation of a
consumer’s position on the path to purchase and achieves much better predictive accuracy, which could in turn substantially
increase the firm’s revenue. The authors also extend the discussion to aggregators, affiliated websites, and segments of consumers
who are exposed to the firm’s outbound ads. Marketing managers can use this method to extract structured information from
consumers’ search phrases to facilitate their inference of consumers’ latent purchase states and thereby improve marketing
efficiency.
Keywords
path to purchase, search phrase, textual analysis, topic model, hidden Markov model.
Online supplement: https://doi.org/10.1177/0022243720954376
For decades, firms have show n a keen interest in inferring
consumers’ positions on the complex and winding purchase
journey and aimed to deliver the right nudge at the right
moment to enhance conversions. The research on consumers’
decisions and behaviors along their path to purchase dates back
to the awareness-interest-desire-action (AIDA) model (Howard
and Sheth 1969; Strong 1925), in which a prospective con-
sumer first becomes aware of a product, then develops interest,
researches and narrows down options, and finally makes the
purchase. In an online shopping environment, consumers leave
touchpoints along their purchase journeys, and their channel
preferences may vary according to their needs (Li et al. 2020).
Firms routinely gather the granular touchpoint data and endea-
vor to discover consumers’ needs and purchase intentions
through their online visit and purchase behaviors (Taniguchi
2019). By examining the many touchpoints through a variety of
marketing channels, firms have significantly improved their
grasp of the consumer journey.
Prior empirical research on consumers’ purchase journey
has analyzed the patterns of impressions and clicks in click-
stream data or customer relationship management data and
inferred consumers’ purchase propensity based on these pat-
terns—such as the frequency of impressions or clicks, the
sequence of website visits, and the duration between two clicks
(e.g., Manchanda et al. 2006; Montgomery et al. 2004). In
addition to the touchpoint data, textual data can help reveal
consumers’ purchase intentions (Berger et al. 2020). There is
an increasing amount of literature about textual analyses of
consumers’ online word of mouth (Bu ¨schken and Allenby
2016, 2020; Lee and Bradlow 2011; Netzer et al. 2012; Tiru-
nillai and Tellis 2014) and search queries (Gong, Abhishek, and
Li 2018; Liu and Toubia 2018). However, little research has
connected the rich information embedded in consumer-
generated textual data to consumers’ purchase journeys. In this
article, we develop a framework to extract structured and quan-
tifiable information from consumers’ search queries and use
this information to improve the inference about consumers’
purchase intentions along their path to purchase.
Hongshuang (Alice) Li is Assistant Professor of Marketing, Fisher College of
Business, The Ohio State University, USA (email: li.815@osu.edu). Liye Ma is
Associate Professor of Marketing, Robert H. Smith School of Business,
University of Maryland, USA (email: liyema@rhsmith.umd.edu).
Journal of Marketing Research
1-18
ª American Marketing Association 2020
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0022243720954376
journals.sagepub.com/home/mrj


===PAGE BREAK===

The proliferation of online marketing channels provides
marketing managers with various means to interact with con-
sumers, among which the paid search channel has attracted a
large portion of online marketing dollars in recent years (Van-
Boskirk et al. 2019). It generates inbound traffic through con-
sumers’ clicks on both free organic search listings and paid
search listings. The search phrases used by consumers on their
path to purchase are especially informative, as these phrases
directly express what consumers are looking for at that moment
in their own words. The content in these search phrases offers a
glimpse into consumers’ interest, and the variation of search
phrases reveals how consumers’ purchase intentions evolve
along their purchase journeys . Prior marketing research on
search phrases has centered primarily on the presence of a
retailer’s or brand’s name, the popularity of a keyword, and
the specificity of a keyword (Ghose and Yang 2009; Jerath,
Ma, and Park 2014; Li et al. 2016; Lu and Yang 2017; Rutz and
Bucklin 2011). Although recent efforts have been made to use
latent themes in search phrases to infer consumers’ content
preference (Liu and Toubia 2018) and keyword ambiguity
(Gong, Abhishek, and Li 2018), no research has connected the
semantics embedded in these search phrases to consumers’
purchase decisions, arguably one of the most important mar-
keting variables.
Our study fills this gap in the literature by extracting quan-
tifiable semantic information from consumers’ search phrases
to shed light on their positions along the path to purchase.
Specifically, we propose a modeling framework that uses a
topic model to capture the latent themes embedded in consu-
mers’ search phrases and integrates this topic model with
choice models that characterize consumers’ visit and purchase
decisions driven by their latent states of purchase. Compared
with existing applications of topic models in marketing (Bu¨sch-
ken and Allenby 2016, 2020; Liu and Toubia 2018; Tirunillai
and Tellis 2014; Trusov, Ma, and Jamal 2016), including var-
iants of the latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) and the correlated
topic model (CTM), our model is novel in that it integrates a
topic model with consumers’ purchase decisions and utilizes
textual data to infer consumers’ latent purchase intentions.
Consequently, our new approach provides valuable insights
and managerial implications directly associated with the con-
sumers’ purchase decisions. In addition, we provide two imple-
mentations of the modeling framework—one in discrete state
space and the other in continuous state space—for robust and
generalizable applications.
We estimate the proposed model using a rich data set pro-
vided by a large hospitality firm, which conducts marketing
campaigns across multiple online marketing channels such as
search engines, display ads, email, referral engines, and the
firm’s own website. The data consist of touchpoints for more
than 2,000 consumers from August 1, 2012, to December 15,
2012, containing their channel visits, purchases, and search
phrases submitted to search engines such as Google, Yahoo,
Bing, and AOL. From the unstructured search phrases, our
model estimates reveal five distinct latent topics: convenience,
economy, loyalty, luxury, and location. We examine the
dynamics and heterogeneity of consumers’ topic choices along
the path to purchase and analyze the relationship between the
firm’s brands and the topics searched by consumers. Our results
confirm that consumers at different stages of purchase search
on different topics. For example, consumers in an early stage of
purchase are more likely to search the “convenience” and
“loyalty” topics, but as they progress along the path to pur-
chase, the probability of searching both topics decreases. Unco-
vering such semantic information in search phrases provides a
better understanding of consumers’ purchase intentions, which
in turn enables more accurate predictions of their purchase
decisions. For example, at the 5 % false positive rate (FPR),
our proposed model can achieve a 67.2 % true positive rate
(TPR), compared with the 37.8 % TPR from the model that
does not use any textual information, the 54.9 % TPR from the
method that uses textual data in a heuristic approach, and the
52.7% TPR from an LDA-based model. By more accurately
identifying consumers with high purchase propensities, our
model has the potential to substantially increase firms’ market-
ing performance.
By exploiting the semantic information in search queries to
infer consumers’ progress on their path to purchase, our
method makes both methodological and substantive contribu-
tions to the literature. From a methodological perspective, we
provide an integrated modeling framework that connects the
latent topics searched by consumers to their visit and purchase
decisions, in both discrete and continuous state-space versions.
Substantively, we utilize consumers’ search phrases to reveal
crucial insights into their latent purchase stages, which can help
improve a firm’s marketing performance.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. In the next
section, we review several streams of literature related to our
research. We then introduce the proposed model, followed by
the empirical application. Next, we demonstrate the predictive
performance of the proposed model and finally conclude with
summaries, managerial implications, and limitations.
Literature Review
Our research is related to three streams of literature: consu-
mers’ path to purchase, search keywords, and recent applica-
tions of topic models in marketing.
Path to Purchase
Understanding and predicting consumers’ purchase journey has
been a cornerstone in the field of marketing. Several recent
reviews provide comprehensiv e summaries of the relevant
studies (e.g., Hamilton and Price 2019; Lee et al. 2018; Lemon
and Verhoef 2016). The efforts to describe the consumer jour-
ney date back to the classic AIDA framework (Howard and
Sheth 1969; Strong 1925), in which a consumer progresses
through awareness, interest, desire, and action phases along the
purchase funnel. As the shopping environment has changed
dramatically over time (e.g., the growth of online shopping,
real-time targeting and promotion, pre- and postpurchase
2 Journal of Marketing Research XX(X)

===PAGE BREAK===

information sharing among consumers), the AIDA model has
also been expanded and modified accordingly. For example,
McKinsey & Company depicts a consumer’s shopping journey
with a circular consumer decision journey model (Court et al.
2009), which differs from the unidirectional AIDA model. In
consumer behavior literature, Lee et al. (2018) propose a
needs-adaptive model and highlight the nonlinear and adaptive
features of the consumer journey.
The advent of multichannel and multiscreen shopping has
significantly increased the complexity of consumers’ purchase
journeys (Verhoef, Kannan, and Inman 2015). Moreover, the
availability of granular online touchpoint data enables empiri-
cal research on a diverse set of topics, such as consumers’
online browsing behaviors, cross-channel search and shopping
behaviors, and staged purchase funnels (Colicev, Kumar, and
O’Connor 2019; Joo et al. 2013; Li and Kannan 2014; Moe and
Fader 2004; Montgomery et al. 2004; Trusov, Ma, and Jamal
2016), which prior researchers were unable to investigate due
to data limitation. Meanwhile, modeling techniques such as the
hidden Markov model (HMM) have been introduced to mar-
keting to help infer dynamic consumer behaviors driven by
latent states (Du and Kamakura 2006; Li, Sun, and Montgom-
ery 2011; Ma, Sun, and Kekre 2015; Netzer, Lattin, and Srini-
vasan 2008; Schweidel, Bradlow, and Fader 2011). However,
the large volume of textual data created by consumers on their
purchase journeys remains underresearched in this stream of
literature. In this article, we propose a model that incorporates
textual data via topic models into a choice model framework
and leverages the rich and direct information contained in the
textual data generated by consumers on their path to purchase.
Search Keywords
As consumers progress on their purchase journeys, they can visit
through various marketing channels, prominent among which is
the search channel. Researchers have studied the characteristics
of search keywords based on the presence of certain terms, such
as brand names, retailer names, and geolocations (Ghose and
Yang 2009; Rutz and Bucklin 2011), the popularity of a keyword
by its ranking (Jerath, Ma, and Park 2014), and the specificity of
a keyword using keyword length (Ghose and Yang 2009) or
subjective ratings (Li et al. 2016). More recent research has also
applied the LDA model on search queries to evaluate consu-
mers’ content preference (Liu and Toubia 2018) and keyword
ambiguity (Gong, Abhishek, and Li 2018). However, the textual
analysis of search phrases has not been connected to consumers’
shopping behaviors or purchase propensities. To fill this gap, we
apply a topic model to identify the latent topics among consu-
mers’ search phrases, which we use to provide insights regarding
consumers’ positions on their path to purchase and help in pre-
dicting their purchase decisions.
Topic Models
Search keywords are one example of textual data consumers
generate on the path to purchase. Other examples of consumer-
generated textual data include search queries submitted on
firms’ websites, text entered in online chats with customer
representatives, and so on. Among the challenges in analyz-
ing such textual data are its lack of structure and high
dimensionality. To address the se challenges, researchers
in statistics and machine learning have developed sophisti-
cated textual analysis methods. Topic models are among
the most widely used methods in this category (Blei and
Lafferty 2007; Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). Following early
e f f o r t st oa p p l yt e x tm i n i n gm e t h o d sa n dh e u r i s t i c s( L e e
and Bradlow 2011; Netzer et a l. 2012), Tirunillai and Tellis
(2014) were among the first to introduce LDA, an early
standard of topic models, to ma r k e t i n gr e s e a r c ht oa n a l y z e
user-generated content. The LDA model is also extended to
constrain words inside the same sentence to the same topic
(Bu¨schken and Allenby 2016) and to leverage the conjunc-
tions and punctuation that capture topic carryover from
sentence to sentence (Bu ¨s c h k e na n dA l l e n b y2 0 2 0 ) .
The fast development of topic models and the interest in
exploiting textual data have fueled a rapid increase in the appli-
cation of topic models. Table 1 summarizes and compares the
relevant studies that have applied topic models on search
keywords.
Several studies have utilized L DA to extract latent topics
from search keywords. Li et al. (2013) use Wikipedia for
data training and then apply LDA on search keywords.
Their analysis does not relate the latent topics to any con-
sumer behaviors such as visits or purchases. Gong,
Abhishek, and Li (2018) apply LDA to extract the latent
topics in keywords and construct an index of topic entropy,
which is then used in the prediction of the click-through
rates (CTR) and ad rankings. Liu and Toubia (2018)
develop a dual LDA model to connect the latent topics in
consumers’ search queries with the latent topics in search
results. In both Gong, Abhishek, and Li and Liu and Toubia,
LDA is first applied on keywords to generate latent topics,
and then in a two-stage manner the LDA output is used in
interpreting consumers’ click-throughs of search ads. Our
model differs from these approa ches in two aspects: first,
our model jointly estimates latent topics and consumers’
visit and purchase choices; second, our model utilizes the
latent topics to infer consum ers’ purchase intentions and
predict their purchase decisions. Moreover, we adopt a dif-
ferent topic model, the CTM, first applied in marketing by
Trusov, Ma, and Jamal (2016), to allow for the correlations
among topics that is not captu red by the LDA applications.
Our work differs from Trus ov, Ma, and Jamal in that we
employ the CTM in an HMM framework to explicitly cap-
ture consumers’ latent purchase stages on their purchase
journeys, and our textual analysis is directly tied to the
consumers’ purchase decisions. Topic models and HMM
have been used in a two-step manner. For example, Wu
et al. (2014) apply both LDA and HMM to study the liter-
ature on stem cells, where LDA is first applied to extract
latent topics, followed by analyses of latent topics using
HMM. In their study, the LDA and HMM are not jointly
Li and Ma 3

===PAGE BREAK===

estimated, and latent topics are treated as latent states,
whereas in our model the topic model and HMM are inte-
grated and the latent states are consumers’ positions on the
path to purchase.
In summary, compared with the a forementioned research,
our article contributes on t wo key aspects: (1) we connect
topic models to consumers’ vis it and purchase choices using
an integrated modeling framework and (2) we focus on
consumers’ latent purchase in tentions and, consequently,
their purchase decisions, arguably the most important vari-
able to marketing managers. These two contributions are
closely connected, with the former taking the methodologi-
cal perspective and the latter t he substantive. In addition to
these two main contributions, we make two other relatively
modest contributions: (1) we have implemented the model
in both continuous an d discrete state spaces and produced
consistent results, which both enhances result robustness
and broadens the applicability of the modeling framework,
and (2) we have expanded the CTM model by jointly esti-
mating all individual-level parameters from a consumer’s
visit, purchase, and topic allocation equations to enable
tighter integration of the topic model and choice models.
We add to the literature with a modeling framework that
researchers and practitioners ca n utilize to better understand
and predict consumers’ latent purchase stages on their path
to purchase.
Model
Conceptual Framework
Consumers progress on the purchase journey to fulfill their
needs. The classic AIDA model depicts the consumer journey
as a purchase funnel (Howard and Sheth 1969; Strong 1925),
where consumers’ latent purchase propensities can be influ-
enced by their goals or situational factors in the shopping envi-
ronment (Hamilton and Price 2019; Lee et al. 2018). Our model
characterizes several key components of the consumer journey,
including the consumer’s channel choice, the topic composi-
tion of their search queries, and the purchase decision, at the
individual consumer level. Figure 1 illustrates the conceptual
framework of our proposed model.
Our model explicitly captures consumers’ latent purchase
states, which reflect their positions on the purchase journey.
We order the latent states according to purchase propensities,
with a higher state implying a higher likelihood of purchase or
a later stage on the path to purchase. Although the states are
ordered, as consumers travel along the purchase journey from
one visit to another, the model allows for transitions between
any states. That is, consumers can progress from a lower state
to a higher state or backtrack from a higher state to a lower one.
As the center of Figure 1 shows, on the nth visit, the con-
sumer is in a latent purchase state that is conditional on her past
latent state on visit (n /C0 1). As the arrows indicate, the current
Table 1. Summary of Relevant Literature.
Research Topic Model
Joint Modeling of Topics and
Consumer Choices
Connected with the Purchase
Decisions
Captures
Latent States
Level of
Analyses
Li et al. (2013) LDA No No No Keyword
Wu et al. (2014) LDA, HMM No No Yes. Latent topics
are treated as
latent states in
HMM.
Keyword
Trusov, Ma, and
Jamal (2016)
CTM No. Visitation intensity and latent
topics are jointly estimated, but
the consumer does not make a
visit choice or purchase choice.
No No Consumer
Gong, Abhishek,
and Li (2018)
LDA No. LDA is first applied to extract
latent topics. Then an entropy
index derived from latent topics is
used in the prediction of CTRs
and ad rankings.
No No Keyword
Liu and Toubia
(2018)
LDA No. LDA is first applied to extract
latent topics. Then the similarity
between latent topics and content
preference is used in the
prediction of CTRs.
No No Consumer
Our article CTM-HMM (a
joint
model)
Yes. Visit and purchase decisions are
jointly modeled with latent topics.
Yes. Both discrete-state and
continuous-state models are
implemented to capture the latent
purchase intentions. The purchase
decisions are jointly estimated
with channel choices and search
topic choices.
Yes. Latent stages
of purchase are
explicitly
captured as
latent states.
Consumer
Notes: CTR ¼ click-through rate.
4 Journal of Marketing Research XX(X)

===PAGE BREAK===

latent state on visit n determines which channel the consumer
chooses to visit, her search topic, and her purchase decision.
The consumer moves along the path to purchase by using one
or more marketing channels until she either quits or converts.
Channel visits help capture the encounters with the firm and the
environmental factors that influence the consumer’s transition
among latent states, thus performing a crucial role in moving
consumers through the purchase journey. The channel choice
on the nth visit can further affect the consumer’s latent state on
the next visit, visit (n þ 1). If the visit involves any search
queries, the latent state also affects the topic composition of
that search. At the end of visit n, the consumer makes a pur-
chase decision based on her latent state. Channel choice, search
topic, and purchase all help us infer the consumer’s latent state
of purchase on visit n, which then determines the latent state on
visit (n þ 1).
Consumers’ search queries offer information about their
purchase intentions—consumers in an early state of purchase
journey are likely to have different focuses from consumers
close to purchase, leading to different keyword choices. While
extant literature has explored this idea by comparing generic
with branded searches (Rutz and Bucklin 2011) or by analyzing
keyword popularity (Jerath, Ma, and Park 2014), textual anal-
ysis tools such as topic models now make a more in-depth
analysis of search semantics feasible.
In this study, we use a modified version of CTM (Blei and
Lafferty 2007), which allows for both the inclusion of covari-
ates in determining topic weight and the flexible correlations
among topics. In our context, the modified CTM setup enables
us to integrate the topic model into the choice models for
channel visit and purchase decisions, such that the textual
information can be used to infer consumers’ progress on their
path to purchase. Specifically, we posit that the search phrases
consumers use are driven by the specific topics of focus in their
mind, and such topics evolve as they navigate through the
purchase journey. Analyzing the topics of consumers’ search
phrases, therefore, can help managers better assess consumers’
purchase intentions.
Our goal is to develop an integrated model that incorporates
textual data to help infer consumers’ latent purchase stage.
Both discrete-state and contin uous-state models have been
widely used to model hidden states, and both are compatible
with our conceptual framework. For broader applicability, we
develop two model specifications consistent with the concep-
tual framework, one using discrete states (i.e., HMM) and the
other using continuous states. Overall, we find that the HMM
version has better predictive performance than the continuous
state-space version, while the key empirical findings are con-
sistent between the two. Because these two model specifica-
tions share the same theoretical foundation with only technical
differences, in the main text we discuss only the HMM version.
More details of the continuous state-space version are provided
in Web Appendices A–C. The model setup of the continuous
state-space implementation appears in Web Appendix A. Web
Appendix B describes the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
procedure for the continuous state-space model. Web Appen-
dix C reports the empirical findings, robustness checks, and
predictive performance of the continuous state-space model.
Model Specification
We develop a comprehensive model, guided by the conceptual
framework, to analyze consumers’ channel visits, keyword
searches, and conversions. We consider a set of I consumers,
indexed by i (i ¼ 1, ... , I). Consumers move along their pur-
chase journeys driven by their latent states of purchase (Berger
et al. 2020; Howard and Sheth 1969; Lemon and Verhoef 2016;
Taniguchi 2019). In the model, the latent state of purchase
determines a consumer’s decisions on what topic to search,
which channel to visit and, ultimately, whether to make a pur-
chase. A consumer’s underlying state, and thus her purchase
propensity, evolves depending on her goals and encounters
with the firm and contextual factors across visits (Lee et al.
2018). We define a set of S hidden states to capture the con-
sumer’s latent states of purchase and denote the state of
consumer i at visit n as s in, where s in 2 1; ... ; Sfg . For identi-
fication, we assume that states are ordered in increasing intrin-
sic purchase propensities (si milar to Netzer, Lattin, and
Srinivasan [2008], in which states were assumed to have
increasing donation probabilities). With this assumption,
Channel 
choicePurchase Search 
topic
Latent purchase state
at visit (n − 1)
Latent purchase state
at visit n
Latent purchase state
at visit (n + 1)
Figure 1. Conceptual framework.
Notes: We elaborate the details only for the nth visit. Arrows indicate dependency.
Li and Ma 5

===PAGE BREAK===

a higher state in our setup indicates that the consumer is at a
later stage of the purchase process and more likely to buy,
whereas a lower state suggests the consumer is at an earlier
stage. As a consumer visits over time, she can transition among
states in any order—from a lower state to a higher state or vice
versa, and s in is updated accordingly after each visit.
We model a consumer’s jour ney along latent purchase
stages with the standard HMM approach, where both the initial
state and the transition among states across visits are modeled
probabilistically. The initial state probability is governed by the
vector P 0 ¼ð r01; ... ; r0SÞ, where r0s is the probability that a
consumer starts from state s at the beginning of the first visit, or
the first visit after a purchase, which is considered the begin-
ning of the next purchase journey. On each visit n, consumer i
accumulates information, which may change her latent state of
purchase. The state transition probability of consumer i at visit
n is specified as an S /C2 Sm a t r i x : Pin ¼ rinss0
/C8/C9
s;s0 2 1;...;Sfg ,
where rinss0 denotes the probability that consumer i transitions
from state s on visit n to state s
0
on visit ðn þ 1Þ. Because the
state transition is driven by information acquired through chan-
nel visits, we model the state-transition probabilities as chan-
nel-specific:
Pin ¼ Pjin ; Pj ¼ rjss0
no
s;s0 2 1;...;Sfg
; j ¼ 1; ... ; J: ð1Þ
In Equation 1, j in represents the channel used by consumer i
at visit n. The evolution of the consumer’s latent state of pur-
chase is thus governed by the initial probability vector P 0
together with J state-transition matrices P j; j ¼ 1; ... ; J. Con-
sistent with the conceptual framework, this technical setup
captures both the consumer’s distinct latent purchase stages
and the flexible transition among stages.
At the beginning of each visit, the consumer first decides
which channel to use, choosing from all J channels. A consu-
mer’s channel visit not only moves her along the path to pur-
chase, as discussed previously on state transition, but also
reflects her present position on the purchase journey. There-
fore, we model a consumer’s channel choice as driven by her
latent state of purchase. The probability of consumer i choosing
channel j on her nth visit is:
pv
ijn ¼ pv
ijsin ¼
expðlijsin ÞP
jexpðlijsin Þ ; j ¼ 1; ... ; J; liJsin ¼ 0: ð2Þ
In Equation 2, the superscript v on the left-hand side repre-
sents visit. The channel choice probabilities are determined by
the channel-specific parameters, lijsin , with channel J being the
baseline. The parameters are state-dependent, as indicated by
sin in the subscript, to capture the concept that consumers at
different purchase stages may have different channel prefer-
ences. The parameters are also consumer-specific, which we
estimate using a hierarchical Bayesian setup, discussed in the
next subsection.
At the end of each visit, the consumer decides whether to
make a purchase. The purchase probability conditional on the
consumer’s latent purchase state is specified in Equation 3. The
superscript p on the left-hand side represents purchase. The
parameter aisin characterizes consumer i’s propensity to pur-
chase on her nth visit, which determines the binary logit pur-
chase probability.
pp
in ¼ pp
isin
¼ expðaisin Þ
1 þ expðaisin Þ : ð3Þ
A consumer’s visit may begin with a search consisting of a
set of words. We account for the generation of such keywords
using topic models. Specifically, we employ the CTM to inte-
grate the topic model into the overall framework (i.e., to link
keyword searches with consumers’ position along the path to
purchase) and allow for flexible correlations among topics. We
denote the search phrase submitted by consumer i on the nth
visit as W in ¼ win1 ; ... ; winKinfg . Each word of W in is drawn
from a topic t ink 2 1; ... ; Tfg ; k ¼ 1; ... ; Kin, where T is the
total number of topics. Each topic t is defined by a mapping to
words Ft ¼ ft1 ; ... ftVfg , where ftw represents the probabil-
ity of a word from topic t being the word w, and V is the size of
the vocabulary. Consistent with both LDA and CTM, these
topic-to-word mappings are specified as following a Dirichlet
distribution:
Ft * Dirichlet ðZtÞ: ð4Þ
Each word w ink is thus drawn from a multinomial
distribution:
wink * MultinomialðFtink Þ: ð5Þ
As the consumer progresses along the purchase journey, the
topic composition of her search may change according to her
latent state of purchase. Let p w
itn ¼ pw
itsin denote the topic prob-
ability (i.e., the probability of each word of the search phrase
used by consumer i on her nth visit being drawn from topic t,
where the superscript w is for topic composition. We model
each p w
itsin through a logistic transformation as follows:
pw
itn ¼ pw
itsin ¼ expðyitsin ÞP
texpðyitsin Þ ; t ¼ 1; :::::; T; yðiTsinÞ ¼ 0: ð6Þ
In Equation 6, s in in the subscript indicates that the topic prob-
ability is state-dependent. This captures the notion that consu-
mers in different purchase stages may search different topics,
as discussed in the conceptual framework. Furthermore, mak-
ing the topic parameters state-dependent effectively integrates
the HMM part and the CTM part of the model, allowing the
textual information to assist in the inference of consumers’
purchase stages.
The topic of each word in search phrase W in is then drawn
from the multinomial distribution:
zink *Multinomialðpw
isin Þ: ð7Þ
To summarize the relationshi p among the parameters in
Equations 2–7, Figure 2 displays a plate diagram for our pro-
posed model at a specific visit under latent state s. All
6 Journal of Marketing Research XX(X)

===PAGE BREAK===

subscripts and superscripts are suppressed in this graph, with
details of hierarchical Bayesian setup being discussed in the
next subsection. The boxes in Figure 2 are plates indicating
replicates of visits, search phrases, words, and topics, and the
arrows between nodes denote conditional dependencies. The
shaded nodes w, v, and p are observations of word, visit, and
purchase, respectively, while the other nodes represent random
variables. Parameter a denotes the coefficient in the purchase
model, and l is the parameter for the visit model. The para-
meters in braces, a, l, and y, are a jointly estimated vector. The
arrow pointing from y to z and then to w from the left, as well as
the arrow pointing from Z to F and then to w from the right,
illustrate the structure of CTM. In the plate diagram, the CTM
and LDA models look the same. However, while y follows a
Dirichlet distribution in LDA, it follows a logistic transforma-
tion in CTM.
We explicitly model consumers’ latent purchase intention via
the latent states in the HMM framework. These latent states
reflect consumers’ purchase propensities and determine which
channels they choose to visit, their search topics, and purchase
decisions. Consumers move through the path to purchase by
using one or more marketing channels until they either quit or
convert. Channel visits thus perform a crucial function in mov-
ing consumers through the purchase journey, and the visit
choices affect consumers’ latent states on the next visit. At the
end of a visit, consumers make purchase decisions based on their
latent states. If a visit involves any search queries, the latent state
also affects the topic composition of that search. Meanwhile, the
search keywords also offer information about the consumer’s
purchase intention—a consumer in the early state of purchase
is likely to have a different focus from a consumer very close to
purchase, leading to very different keyword choices. We can
utilize these keywords to know what latent topics the consumer
is searching, and meanwhile these keywords can also help us
identify the consumer’s current latent state.
Our model makes three behavioral assumptions. First, con-
sumers travel through different states in any order on their path
to purchase. Second, we assume that different latent purchase
states lead to different consumer decisions—different channel
visit choices, different topics to search, and different purchase
propensities. These two are standard assumptions and common
in the literature of the consumer purchase journey. The third
assumption is that consumers’ search phrases consist of and
reflect multiple underlying topics, which is a standard assump-
tion in topic models.
We note an important distinction between our model and
LDA, given the latter’s popularity in the literature. In the orig-
inal LDA model, the document-to-topic mapping is modeled
using a Dirichlet prior. By contrast, in our model the mapping
is done through a logistic transformation (see Equation 6) fol-
lowing the CTM setup, which allows for both the inclusion of
covariates1 in determining topic probabilities and the admis-
sion of correlations among topics, rendering a more general and
flexible model. In addition, our model further extends from the
standard CTM setup by allowing for correlations among all
individual customer-level parameters to enable tighter integra-
tion of the topic model into the overall modeling framework.
Our model is different from existing heuristic approaches
that extract information from search phrases, such as categor-
izing keywords as branded versus generic (Ghose and Yang
2009; Rutz and Bucklin 2011), ranking keywords by their
popularity (Jerath, Ma, and Park 2014), or subjectively evalu-
ating the specificity of keywords (Li et al. 2016). These heur-
istics result in one or a set of measures that are later used as
explanatory variables in the model of visit, purchase, or other
decisions. In contrast to these existing studies, the latent topics
in our model do not directly enter the visit utility in Equation 2
or purchase utility in Equation 3 as explanatory variables. We
believe it is not the consumers’ topic choices that drive their
visit and purchase decisions. Rather, it is the latent purchase
states that determine the consumers’ topic choices as well as
their visit and purchase decisions. Thus, we model the topic
decisions as determined by the latent purchase states in a sep-
arate equation (i.e., Equation 6). The topic decisions help to
identify the latent states of purchase, which also affect the visit
and purchase decisions through Equations 2 and 3.
Hierarchical Bayesian Setup
To complete the model setup, we adopt a hierarchical Bayesian
framework by treating all indi vidual consumer-level para-
meters as drawn from a population-level multivariate Normal
distribution:
Gi*MVNð /C22G; SÞ; ð8Þ
where Gi ¼ð aisfg s¼1;...;S; lijs
/C8/C9
j¼1;...;J/C0 1;s¼1;...;S; yitsfg t¼1;...;T/C0 1;s¼1;...;SÞT:
In Equation 8, the vector Gi includes all individual
consumer-level parameters that govern visits, purchases, and
α
λ
θ
p
v
z Φ η
Search phrase
Word Topic
Visit
w
s
Figure 2. Graphical representation of the proposed HMM.
Notes: We illustrate a scenario in which the consumer is under the latent state s.
All subscripts and superscripts are suppressed in this graph. Boxes are plates
indicating replicates of visit, search phrase, word, and topic, and the arrows
denote conditional dependencies. The shaded nodes are observations, while
the other nodes represent random variables. The nodes F and Z are defined in
Equation 4, whereas node z is posited in Equation 7. The parameters in braces,
a, l,a n d y, are a jointly estimated vector.
1 We include covariates in the continuous-state model in Web Appendix A.
Li and Ma 7

===PAGE BREAK===

topic choices, which are drawn from a multivariate Normal
distribution. /C22G is the population-level mean parameter of this
distribution, and S is the covariance matrix. The covariance
matrix represents a further extension from the standard CTM
setup by accounting for the correlations among all individual-
level parameters rather than just the topic-weight ones. This
setup, in addition to making topic probabilities state-
dependent, further integrates the topic model component into
the overall framework. 2 With this setup, the model can then be
estimated using the MCMC method by iterating through ran-
dom draws of each parameter from its posterior distribution
conditional on other parameters. Web Appendix D describes
the MCMC estimation procedure for the model.
Empirical Application
In this section, we illustrate an empirical application of our
proposed model on consumers’ path-to-purchase data compris-
ing both touchpoint data from consumers’ visits and purchases
and textual data from consumers’ search phrases. We first
describe the data set and the contextual background and select
the optimal number of latent states and topics for the proposed
model. Then, we report our re sults in detail, followed by
robustness checks on our empirical findings.
Data Description
Our data set is provided by a leading global hospitality com-
pany that owns a parent brand and a broad portfolio of sub-
brands of hotels and lodging facilities. The firm accommodates
both business travelers and leisure travelers, with its parent
brand being considered a high-quality luxury brand and the
service quality and price ranges varying extensively across its
subbrands. At the firm’s website, all brands are classified into
four categories, which, without revealing the firm’s identity,
can be paraphrased as the parent brand and low-end, mid-range,
and high-end subbrands, respectively.
This unique data set contains a random sample of 2,093
consumers’ website visitation and purchase records over four
and a half months from August 1, 2012, to December 15, 2012,
including 40,985 clicks on organic and paid search listings,
display ads, emails, referral links from affiliated sites, social
media and referral sites, and direct visits to the firm’s website.
These observations are recorded at the cookie ID level. A
unique customer is identified by the email address used to
enroll in the focal firm’s loyalty program. When multiple coo-
kie IDs are found to log onto the same customer account, the
tracked visits and purchases from these cookie IDs are merged
under the same customer’s profile. If a cookie ID does not show
any login activity to any registered customer account, this coo-
kie ID is treated as a unique customer. The firm integrates its
touchpoint data from five sources: (1) data related to display
ads and search ads collected by Google DoubleClick, (2)
cookie-based data collected by Omniture SiteCatalyst, 3 (3)
consumers’ direct visits to the firm’s website identified by the
consumers’ cookie IDs and/or login IDs, (4) data shared by
affiliated websites, and (5) data from the firm’s in-house email
management system.
Following extant literature, we group the marketing chan-
nels into three categories: paid, owned, and earned (Stephen
and Galak 2012). The paid category includes the visits through
paid search, paid referral engines, 4 display, affiliated sites, and
business-to-business channels. The owned category contains
direct visits to the firm’s website and visits via email click-
throughs, while the earned category covers the click-throughs
from the remaining channels: organic search, unpaid referral
links and websites, and social media. Table 2 reports the sum-
mary statistics of the click-throughs and conversions of each
channel category. Each channel has a considerable number of
clicks and conversions. Note that we do not observe the impres-
sions preceding these clicks and purchases. The conversion
rates for all channels are in the range of 1.2 % to 2.0 %.
Consumers’ purchase decisions in our context are usually
made after extensive information gathering and deliberation. In
the data set, a consumer typically visits the website repeatedly,
often through multiple channels, before making a purchase.
The 2,093 consumers in our data set made 40,985 visits during
the observation window, with consumers on average making 20
visits and using two out of the three channel categories. The
solid line in Figure 3 shows the model-free relationship
between the conversion rates and consumers’ visit sequence
on the path to purchase. We can see that consumers’ purchase
probability increases with their numbers of visits. A simple
ordinary least square regression of this relationship shows a
positive slope (the dashed line) that is significant at the .05
level.
Table 2. Summary Statistics of Clicks and Conversions.
Channels
Number of
Clicks
Number of
Conversions
Conversion
Rates
Paid 2,094 41 1.958%
Owned 25,091 390 1.554%
Earned 13,800 170 1.232%
Total 40,985 601 1.466%
2 Our model captures correlations am ong parameters at the individual
consumer level. At the visit instance level, the logit setup in Equations 2, 3,
and 6 implies a conditional (on state) independence assumption among search,
visit, and purchase decisions, without accounting for potential correlation
among the respective error terms. Be cause our focus is on using textual
information to help infer states, we use this parsimonious setup on error
terms. If needed, our model can be modified to account for such correlations
(e.g., by using probit instead of logit). We thank an anonymous reviewer for
pointing this out.
3 Omniture SiteCatalyst was acquired by Adobe in 2009 and integrated into
Adobe Marketing Cloud in 2012.
4 Paid referral engines include third-party websites such as Expedia, Orbitz,
Travelocity, and so on. Consumers can also purchase directly at these
third-party websites to receive the f ocal firm’s service. However, we can
observe only the purchases made on the focal firm’s website.
8 Journal of Marketing Research XX(X)

===PAGE BREAK===

When consumers search and click on the focal firm’s
organic or paid search ads, we can observe the exact search
phrases5 typed in by consumers. 6 In the data, we observe 8,163
search phrases submitted by 1,296 consumers to search engines
such as Google, Yahoo, Bing, and AOL. These searches led to
6,945 clicks through earned channels (i.e., organic search links)
and 1,218 clicks through paid channels (i.e., paid search ads).
We preprocess all search phrases following standard steps in
textual analysis, including tr ansforming all words to lower
case, removing stop words and rare words, and stemming.
More details are reported in Web Appendix E. The cleaned
data set contains a corpus of 472 unique words, with the longest
search phrase containing 10 words.
Estimation
We estimate the proposed model with MCMC methods in Java.
Of the 100,000 iterations of drawing the model parameters, we
discard the first 80,000 draws as burn-in. For the remaining
20,000 draws, we keep every 50th draw for the analysis of
posteriors. We run multiple chains, and the convergence of all
Markov chains is evaluated with Geweke’s (1991) diagnostics
which yield an average p-value > .1. In addition, we check the
Gelman–Rubin statistics for be tween-chain variance versus
within-chain variance. The potential scale reduction factors for
parameters are all lower than 1.1.
Selecting the Number of States and Topics
In our study, we first select the number of latent states and the
number of latent topics for the proposed model that best fit the
data set. We vary both the number of states and the number of
topics from two to ten, and find that with four or more latent
states, there are topics in certain states with very few word
occurrences, which can give rise to inaccurate estimation of
the state-dependent parameters. Thus, we limit the state num-
ber to three or lower and report the log-marginal density
(LMD) for all models with fivefold cross-validation in Table 3.
According to the LMD, the best-fitting model is the one with
three latent states and five latent topics, which we choose as the
specification of the proposed model.
Results
We examine the latent topics identified by the proposed model
and name each latent topic based on the meaning conveyed by
its top words as well as its weights on branded words belonging
to different brand categories. As Table 4 shows, we label the
five topics “convenience,” “economy,” “loyalty,” “luxury,”
and “location,” respectively. These labels are created for ease
of reference and do not necessarily encompass the comprehen-
sive meaning of all top words on a topic. Below each topic
label, there are examples of top words on that topic. Note that
each branded word is classified according to the firms’ own
categorization into one of the four categories—parent brand
and low-end, mid-range, and high-end subbrands. The percent-
age in Table 4 is based on the word-topic association, F,i n
Equation 4. Each topic allocates 100 % weight to all words in
the vocabulary. Here we report only the weights for branded
words belonging to the parent, low-end, mid-range, and high-
end brand categories under a specific topic. The bottom row is
the sum of the weights on all branded words under the same
topic.
.0%
.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%Conversion Rate
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 
nth Visit on the Path to Purchase
Figure 3. Changes in conversion rates on the path to purchase.
Notes: The solid line is conversion rates across the nth visit on the purchase
journey. The dashed line is the fitted value based on an ordinary least square
regression.
Table 3. Selecting the Number of States and Topics.
Number of Topics
LMD
Two States Three States
T ¼ 2 /C0 141,709 /C0 146,037
T ¼ 3 /C0 144,388 /C0 145,434
T ¼ 4 /C0 145,845 /C0 140,645
T ¼ 5 /C0 144,660 /C0 137,841
T ¼ 6 /C0 148,035 /C0 145,630
T ¼ 7 /C0 145,780 /C0 150,560
T ¼ 8 /C0 145,248 /C0 146,010
T ¼ 9 /C0 147,156 /C0 159,387
T ¼ 10 /C0 147,094 /C0 158,256
Notes: Higher values of LMD indicate better model fit.
5 The consumer-input search phrase s could be different from the firm’s
“keywords” listed on search engines. The former are directly typed in by
consumers and thus represent consumers’ interests and desires, whereas the
latter are created by the firm and can be broadly or exactly matched to the
consumers’ search phrases. For example, a consumer may search for “family
friendly suite in NYC,” and a firm may win the bid for keyword “hotel NYC”
using broad matching and guide the consumer to the firm’s site. In this
example, the consumer’s search query provides richer and more accurate
information on the consumer’s purchase intention than the keyword bid on
by the firm.
6 Our data contains only the search phrases consumers type into search
engines. We do not observe consumers’ search terms at the firm’s own
website or third-party referral websites. Moreover, we do not observe the
search results not clicked on by consumers.
Li and Ma 9

===PAGE BREAK===

The first column of Table 4 shows the “convenience” topic.
Its top words are related to the convenient features of a trip,
such as “downtown,” “airport,” “city,” and “center.” Its
weights on the parent brand and low-end and high-end sub-
brands are in the middle compared with other topics, but it has
the highest weight, 13.8 %, on the mid-range branded words.
At the focal hotel chain, the mid-range brands target mainly
business travelers and feature the convenient amenities of
their hotels. Thus, we name this topic “convenience.” The
second topic includes top words like “inn,” “suite,” “extend,”
and “stay,” and the weight on low-end subbrands is 28.8 %,t h e
highest among all topics, while each of the remaining four
topics receives a weight less than 1 % on words associated
with low-end subbrands. The greater weight on low-end sub-
brands in this topic could imply that consumers are more
interested in affordable hote l rooms or economical rooms
suited for a longer stay. Accordingly, we classify the second
topic as the “economy” topic. The third topic includes top
words like “reward,” “point,” and “platinum,” which are
directly associated with the fir m’s loyalty program. In addi-
tion, 57.5 % weight is loaded onto words related to the parent
brand, and the total weight on branded words is 59.8 %,t h e
highest among all five topics. Thus, we label the third topic as
the “loyalty” topic. The fourth topic contains a collection of
top words referring to high-end travel experiences such as
“beach,” “resort,” “harbor,” and “spa.” Moreover, its weight
on high-end subbrands is the highest among all five topics and
its weight on low-end subbrands is the lowest. Therefore, we
label this topic as the “luxury” t opic. The last topic contains
general words such as “hotel” and a few travel destinations
such as Denver, Boston, and P ittsburgh. Its total weight on
branded words is only 5.5 %, the lowest among all topics, so
we label this topic as “location” and use it as the baseline topic
in model estimation.
Our coefficient estimates are based on fivefold cross-
validation. Table 5 reports the posterior means and the 95 %
credible intervals of the proposed HMM, regarding consumers’
purchase decision, visit decision, and the topic composition of
search phrases being used.
The top part of Table 5 shows the coefficient estimates of a
for each state. Higher a values correspond to higher conversion
propensities. Accordingly, we refer to States 1–3 as “early,”
“middle,” and “late” states of purchase on the consumer jour-
ney, respectively.
The middle part of Table 5 presents the coefficient estimates
for consumers’ visit decisions (i.e., how consumers choose
among paid, owned, and earned channels to make a visit on
the path to purchase). We set earned channels as the baseline
with visit utility being 0. The results suggest that the early-
journey visit utility is the highest for owned channels such as
the firm’s own website and its email newsletters and cam-
paigns, followed by earned channels including organic search,
unpaid referrals, and social media; paid channels such as paid
search, paid referrals, affiliate sites, and business-to-business
channels are the least visited at the beginning of a purchase
journey. As the consumers advance along the purchase journey
from State 1 to State 2, they are more likely to visit owned
channels and even less likely to visit paid channels, whereas in
State 3, the consumers’ propensities to visit owned channels is
the lowest across all three states and the propensities to visit
paid channels is the highest. Albeit with variation across states,
consumers’ likelihood to visit owned channels is the highest
among all three channels, followed by earned channels and
then paid channels.
The lower part of Table 5 shows the substantive findings
from consumers’ textual data. These mean estimates reveal the
trend of the underlying topics searched by consumers and illus-
trate the relationship between consumers’ latent purchase states
and the latent topics they search on. As summarized previously
in this subsection, we have identified five latent topics: con-
venience, economy, loyalty, luxury, and location. The last
topic, location, is used as the baseline. At the early purchase
state, State 1, the initial topics searched by consumers are more
likely to be the loyalty topic, followed by the convenience
topic. In comparison, consumers are less likely to search on
the luxury and economy topics than the location topic up front
on the path to purchase. When consumers’ latent purchase
states are switched up, they search more on the economy and
Table 4. Example Top Words and Associations Between Branded Words and Topics.
Topic 1 2 3 4 5
Label Convenience Economy Loyalty Luxury Location
Examples of top words
downtown, airport,
city, center
inn, suite,
extend, stay
reward, point,
club, platinum
beach, resort,
harbor, spa
hotel, denver,
boston, pittsburgh
Weight on parent brand 19.4% 4.9% 57.5% 18.4% .9%
Weight on low-end brands .4% 28.8% .1% .1% .4%
Weight on mid-range brands 13.8% 11.6% .7% 1.2% 2.8%
Weight on high-end brands 2.0% .2% 1.5% 7.1% 1.4%
Total weight on brands 35.5% 45.6% 59.8% 26.8% 5.5%
Notes: The percentage is based on the word-topic association, F, in Equation 4. Each topic allocates 100% weight to all words in the vocabulary. Here, we report
only the weight for branded words belonging to the parent, low-end, mid-range, and high-end brand categories under a specific topic. The bottom row ad ds up the
weights on all branded words under the same topic.
10 Journal of Marketing Research XX(X)

===PAGE BREAK===

luxury topics and less on the loyalty topic, whereas the conve-
nience topic is more likely to be searched at the early and late
states, as compared with the location topic.
In summary, consumers start off by searching for the brand
names and the loyalty program of the focal firm that account
for a heavy weight on the loyalty topic. They may pay more
attention to the convenience and location of the hotel and less
attention to the affordability or the luxury features. When con-
sumers move to the later stage of their purchase journey, they
may pay more attention to the affordability and luxury options,
as their questions and concerns related to the loyalty program,
convenience, and location may have already been addressed.
Our empirical findings of the dynamic latent topics reflect the
adaptive consumer needs along their purchase journey (Lee
et al. 2018). The interpretation of the latent topics can be
enriched by extant behavioral research on information process-
ing. For example, in our context, when consumers are more
focused on the affordability of the hotel (a more utilitarian
feature), the purchase can be more goal-driven and involve
deeper information processing (Novak, Hoffman, and Duha-
chek 2003). However, when consumers seek luxury features
at a hotel (a more hedonic feature), the information may be
processed in a more holistic ma nner (Melnyk, Klein, and
Vo¨lckner 2012). Together with the new knowledge of consu-
mers’ latent purchase states and latent search topics, using our
proposed model, marketing managers have access to a deeper
and richer understanding of consumers’ current needs and pur-
chase intentions and thus can improve their ads and offerings
accordingly.
Table 6 shows the posterior means and 95 % credible inter-
vals of initial probabilities of each latent state and the transition
probabilities among states. Ini tially, when a consumer first
visits the firm’s website or when we observe a consumer for
the first time, 37.3 % consumers belong to the early purchase
state, 52.6 % in the middle state, and 10.1 % in the late state.
There is considerable stickiness for consumers to stay in the
same state on consecutive visits, as shown on the diagonals of
the transition matrices in Table 6. For example, when the recent
visit is to paid channels, the probability is 88.2 % for consumers
to stay in State 1, 91.0 % to stay in State 2, and 85.9 % to stay in
State 3. Similar stickiness can also be found for the other two
channels. The credible intervals for the probabilities to stay in
Table 5. Estimation Results from the Proposed HMM.
State 1 State 2 State 3
Purchase
a /C0 8.032 [/C0 8.065, /C0 8.000] /C0 4.817 [/C0 4.855, /C0 4.775] /C0 2.662 [/C0 2.691, /C0 2.630]
Visit
Paid channel ( l1) /C0 2.145 [/C0 2.225, /C0 2.055] /C0 2.306 [/C0 2.392, /C0 2.221] /C0 1.559 [/C0 1.625, /C0 1.505]
Owned channel ( l2) .718 [.580, .862] 1.172 [.998, 1.329] .345 [.241, .458]
Earned channel (baseline) — — —
Topic
Convenience ( y1) .320 [.218, .405] /C0 .048 [ /C0 .160, .041] .130 [.066, .201]
Economy (y2) /C0 .655 [/C0 .756, /C0 .574] /C0 .454 [/C0 .544, /C0 .363] /C0 .189 [/C0 .269, /C0 .104]
Loyalty ( y3) .634 [.548, .727] .607 [.496, .709] .345 [.268, .422]
Luxury ( y4) /C0 .400 [/C0 .469, /C0 .326] /C0 .386 [/C0 .481, /C0 .295] /C0 .040 [ /C0 .110, .024]
Location (baseline) — — —
Note: All reported estimates are posterior means, along with the 95% credible intervals in brackets. The significant mean estimates are highlighted in bol dface.
Table 6. Mean Posterior Initial Probabilities and Transition Matrices.
State 1 State 2 State 3
Initial probabilities 37.3% [34.8%, 40.4%] 52.6% [50.1%, 55.7%] 10.1% [8.3%, 11.8%]
Transition Probabilities, Given That (t /C0 1) Visit Was in a Paid Channel
From State 1 88.2% [84.7%, 92.0%] 11.1% [7.7%, 14.9%] .7% [.0%, 2.0%]
From State 2 3.2% [1.4%, 5.3%] 91.0% [88.5%, 93.8%] 5.8% [3.3%, 8.0%]
From State 3 5.6% [1.3%, 10.0%] 8.4% [3.0%, 13.8%] 85.9% [79.6%, 91.1%]
Transition Probabilities, Given That (t /C0 1) Visit was in an Owned Channel
From State 1 90.1% [88.9%, 91.1%] 8.6% [7.5%, 9.6%] 1.3% [.7%, 1.8%]
From State 2 5.3% [4.7%, 5.9%] 93.7% [93.1%, 94.3%] 1.1% [.8%, 1.3%]
From State 3 3.2% [1.5%, 4.7%] 3.4% [1.9%, 5.0%] 93.4% [91.6%, 95.0%]
Transition Probabilities, Given That (t /C0 1) Visit was in an Earned Channel
From State 1 88.7% [87.7%, 89.9%] 11.1% [9.9%, 12.2%] .2% [.0%, .5%]
From State 2 8.7% [8.0%, 9.8%] 90.1% [89.2%, 91.0%] 1.2% [.7%, 1.7%]
From State 3 1.5% [.1%, 3.0%] 8.9% [6.8%, 11.2%] 89.6% [87.4%, 91.8%]
Notes: All reported estimates are posterior means, along with the 95% credible intervals in brackets.
Li and Ma 11

===PAGE BREAK===

States 1 and 2 have considerable overlap among all three chan-
nels, while the probability to stay in State 3 is the highest for
recent visits to owned channels, which is 93.4 %, compared
with 85.9 % for paid channels and 89.6 % for earned channels.
The off-diagonal numbers indicate the probabilities of switch-
ing from one state to another, conditional on the channel most
recently visited. Some of the credible intervals of the estimates
are fairly large, so that the measure conditional on one channel
may not be statistically different from those based on the other
two channels. However, some interesting patterns emerge from
the matrices. For example, if a consumer’s most recent visit
was to a paid channel, she has a good chance of advancing from
State 1 to higher states, and the probability of moving from
State 2 to State 3 is 5.8%, significantly higher than those for the
other two channels. Another example is for consumers whose
most recent visits were to an earned channel, the probability of
switching down from State 2 to State 1 is 8.7 %, which is the
highest among all channels. These estimates of transition prob-
abilities provide insights into consumers’ state switching, con-
ditional on their recent visits to a specific channel.
Robustness Check
Some firms may strategically target prospective customers in
hopes of attracting more traffic to their website. As a result,
some consumers’ interactions with the firm could be a response
to the firm’s outreach. Although the focal firm did not use an
automated algorithm to selectiv ely target certain customers
with display ads or emails during the data collection period,
the consumers who received firm-initiated contacts, such as
display ads and emails, may have been determined by their
purchase inertia and past interactions with the firm. Thus, in
this subsection, we test the robustness of our empirical findings
with subset samples that contrast the consumers who have been
exposed to the firm’s outbound marketing contact, such as
display ads and emails, with those who are not. These analyses
of data subsets do not eliminate the impact of a firm’s targeting
via display ads and emails. Rather, we use it as a post hoc
robustness check to examine whether the key empirical find-
ings would differ between the two groups of customers. In
particular, we offer one such subset analysis of display ads and
the other on emails. Apart from these subset analyses, we also
pay special attention to the third-party aggregators and
affiliated websites that can act differently from the other paid
channels. We treat these aggregators and affiliated sites as a
separate channel category and estimate the proposed model
with four channel categories.
In the first subset analysis, we split the data into two subsets
based on whether the customer has clicked on any display ads
during the data window. We estimate our model separately on
these two subsets and compare their results with our main
estimates. The estimates of this subset analysis are presented
in columns 2 and 3 of Table 7, compared with those using the
full data set in the first column. The estimates on these two
subsets closely resemble the estimates in the main model
except for some insignificant estimates for the convenience and
economy topics in State 3. In the second analysis, we split the
data into two subsets based on whether a consumer has clicked
on any emails during the data window. The estimates based on
these subsets are reported in columns 4 and 5 of Table 7. The
coefficient estimates are also similar to the main estimates,
except that the coefficients for the luxury topic become insig-
nificant in State 1 for both subsets and in State 2 for the subset
with email clicks. In both subset analyses, a few topic para-
meters lose significance. Determining whether this is due to
smaller sample sizes requires more data. Nevertheless, the
parameters for the visit and purchase decisions and all signif-
icant topic parameters are consistent with those using the full
data set.
In addition to firm-initiated channels such as display ads or
emails, third-party aggregators and affiliate websites could also
play an important yet different role from the other paid chan-
nels. Thus, to examine the paid channels more deeply, we
perform another robustness check in which aggregators and
affiliated sites are treated as a separate channel category, the
referral channels, alongside the original paid, owned, and
earned channels. We run this four-channel analysis using the
proposed model and report the results in the last column of
Table 7. The addition of this new referral channel does not
significantly change the estimates for the other three channels.
This helps validate the robustness of our empirical findings and
also sheds light on the impact of the aggregators and affiliated
websites. Our results indicate that the probability of visiting a
referral channel compared with that of visiting earned channels
decreases as consumers move from State 1 to State 2 and then
increases from State 2 to State 3. Generally speaking, the
impact of aggregators and affiliated websites is very similar
to the impact of the other channels in the paid channel category.
Overall, the subset analyses and the four-channel analysis
confirm the robustness of our results. Although we cannot
ignore or eliminate the firm’s strategic targeting or the hetero-
geneity in each channel category, when we contrast the con-
sumers with and without interactions with the firm’s outbound
marketing and when we further refine consumers’ channel
options, our empirical findings remain robust.
Predicting Consumer Purchases
One key motivation of our study is to connect topic models
with consumers’ choices on the purchase journey, which can
help firms assess consumers’ positions on their path to pur-
chase and improve the firms’ performance. In this section,
we elaborate on two aspects related to the improved predictive
accuracy from our model: (1) how much improvement our
model makes in predictive accuracy against three benchmark
models; and (2) how the more accurate assessment of consu-
mers’ positions affects firms’ decisions.
Improved Predictive Accuracy
By uncovering the semantic information embedded in search
queries, our model reveals meaningful insights into consumers’
12 Journal of Marketing Research XX(X)

===PAGE BREAK===

progress on their path to purchase. With an improved under-
standing of consumers’ purchase propensity, our model enables
more accurate predictions of consumers’ purchase decisions, a
key challenge faced by marketing managers. Next, we compare
the proposed model with three benchmark models. The first
benchmark model is the no-topic model, which includes only
the visit and purchase decisions. That is, the topic equation in
the proposed model is removed. Models from many extant
studies, which may use different modeling structures, are com-
parable to this no-topic benchmark model in terms of the
amount of information incorporated into the model. The com-
parison between the proposed model and the no-topic model
shows the effect of including textual information. The second
benchmark model is the top-50-word model, similar to the first
benchmark model except that it includes a dummy variable for
each of the top 50 most frequently used words in both the visit
and purchase equations. This benchmark model does not have
an integrated equation to jointly capture the underlying topics
searched by consumers, but it can capture to a certain extent the
relationship between frequently used words and consumers’
underlying purchase intentions. The third benchmark model
is the LDA model, in which we estimate a standard LDA model
on the search phrases and add the topic weights from the LDA
estimates into the visit and purchase equations as explanatory
Table 7. Results of Subset Analysis and Four-Channel Analysis.
Full Set Display No Display Email No Email Four Channels
State 1
Purchase
a /C0 8.032 /C0 8.250 /C0 7.833 /C0 8.010 /C0 7.750 /C0 7.825
Visit
Paid channel ( l1) /C0 2.145 /C0 1.868 /C0 2.296 /C0 1.623 /C0 2.211 /C0 1.874
Owned channel ( l2) .718 .537 1.113 1.031 .387 1.247
Referral channel /C0 2.661
Earned channel (baseline) — — — — — —
Topic
Convenience ( y1) .320 .320 .354 .178 .104 .220
Economy (y2) /C0 .655 /C0 .210 /C0 .321 /C0 .444 /C0 .411 /C0 .330
Loyalty ( y3) .634 .781 .727 .657 .378 .431
Luxury ( y4) /C0 .400 /C0 .155 /C0 .305 .009 .066 /C0 .124
Location (baseline) — — — — — —
State 2
Purchase
a /C0 4.817 /C0 4.988 /C0 4.801 /C0 4.813 /C0 4.933 /C0 5.130
Visit
Paid channel ( l1) /C0 2.306 /C0 1.751 /C0 2.270 /C0 1.894 /C0 1.936 /C0 2.132
Owned channel ( l2) 1.172 .826 .706 .871 1.312 1.070
Referral channel /C0 2.883
Earned channel (baseline) — — — — — —
Topic
Convenience ( y1) /C0 .048 .101 .070 .205 .160 .192
Economy (y2) /C0 .454 /C0 .455 /C0 .094 /C0 .185 /C0 .443 /C0 .411
Loyalty ( y3) .607 .295 .334 .889 .169 .795
Luxury ( y4) /C0 .386 /C0 .589 /C0 .420 /C0 .151 /C0 .360 /C0 .238
Location (baseline) — — — — — —
State 3
Purchase
a /C0 2.662 /C0 2.003 /C0 2.732 /C0 2.235 /C0 2.701 /C0 2.613
Visit
Paid channel ( l1) /C0 1.559 /C0 .425 /C0 1.804 /C0 .717 /C0 1.196 /C0 1.436
Owned channel ( l2) .345 .606 .667 .474 .476 .332
Referral channel /C0 1.906
Earned channel (baseline) — — — — — —
Topic
Convenience ( y1) .130 /C0 .132 .135 .383 .147 .309
Economy (y2) /C0 .189 /C0 .124 .006 /C0 .497 /C0 .196 /C0 .210
Loyalty ( y3) .345 .300 .604 .175 .116 .701
Luxury ( y4) /C0 .040 /C0 .086 /C0 .047 /C0 .014 .006 /C0 .053
Location (baseline) — — — — — —
Notes: Boldface indicates that the estimates are significant at the 5% level. Column 1 shows the estimates based on the full data set (i.e., those reported in T able 5).
The other columns each use a subset of data.
Li and Ma 13

===PAGE BREAK===

variables, while the topic equation is removed. Although both
our proposed model and the benchmark LDA model incorpo-
rate textual information, the LDA model does not provide the
same richness in heterogeneity or the direct connections with
the visit and purchase decisions as our proposed model does. In
other words, while the amount of information used in both
models is the same, the modeling structures are different—the
LDA benchmark model extracts and uses the textual informa-
tion in a two-step manner, whereas our proposed model incor-
porates the textual information in an integrated manner. We use
the LDA benchmark model to demonstrate the potential bene-
fits of jointly modeling consumers’ visit and purchase deci-
sions together with the topic composition of their search
phrases as we do in the proposed model.
We first assess the model fit by comparing the LMDs of the
visit and purchase equations w ith fivefold cross-validation.
Because none of the three benchmark models have an inte-
grated equation for textual information, we compare only the
LMDs of the visit and purchase equations between the three
benchmark models and the proposed model, as shown in
Table 8. The proposed model has a higher LMD than all bench-
mark models, indicating better model fit. Moreover, the pro-
posed model also outperforms the benchmark models in terms
of both mean absolute error (MAE) and root mean square error
(RMSE), for which lower values indicate better prediction
accuracy. Compared with the benchmark models, the improve-
ment of the proposed model is 7.4 %–10.0% based on MAE and
3.9%–6.2%% based on RMSE. In summary, the superior fit of
the proposed model confirms the value of extracting the deeper
semantic information embedded in search text and incorporat-
ing it in an integrated manner.
To further examine the predictive performance of the pro-
posed model and compare it with that of the benchmark mod-
els, we also generate the receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves of the proposed model to compare against the
three benchmark models in Figure 4. An ROC curve is a two-
dimensional graph, plotting the TPR on the y-axis and the FPR
on the x-axis. As a higher FPR is allowed (usually by making
the selection criteria less stringent), a higher TPR can be
achieved. The 45-degree diagonal line is the baseline accuracy
of flipping a fair coin, and a larger area under the curve (AUC)
indicates better predictive performance. As Figure 4 shows, our
proposed model outperforms all three benchmark models.
In Table 9, we provide two examples at specific FPRs, 5% and
10%, to illustrate the predictive advantage of the proposed model
over benchmark models. Suppose a manager is willing to tolerate
a5 % FPR, as in the scenario shown in the first two columns of
Table 9, the TPR for the proposed model is 67.2%, compared with
a3 7 . 8% TPR for the no-topic model, 54.9% for the top-50-word
model, and 52.7% for the LDA model. The last two columns of
Table 9 show another scenario in which the manager can tolerate a
10% FPR. The proposed model achieves a TPR that is 84.2 %,
higher than the 54.9% TPR for the no-topic model, 70.5% for the
top-50-word model, and 69.1% for the LDA model. The inclusion
of text data, reflected via the comparison between the no-topic
model and the proposed model, leads to approximately 30 %
increase in TPR at the range of 5 %–10% FPRs.
Finally, we compare the AUC between the proposed model
and benchmark models in Table 10. The AUC for in-sample
Table 8. Model Comparison.
Model Definition LMD MAE RMSE
Proposed model HMM with topic
assignment jointly
estimated
/C0 163,576 .0251 .1105
No-topic model HMM /C0 169,402 .0279 .1178
Top-50-word
model
HMM with dummies for
top 50 words
/C0 166,452 .0275 .1150
LDA model HMM with LDA weights /C0 165,453 .0271 .1156
Note: Higher LMD values indicate better model fit. Lower values of MAE or
RMSE indicate better prediction accuracy.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
Proposed
LDA
Top Words
No Topic
Figure 4. ROC curve of proposed HMM versus three benchmark
models.
Notes: All models are built under the HMM framework. Results are based on
fivefold cross-validation. A larger area under the ROC curve indicates better
predictive performance.
Table 9. Illustration of Improvement in Predictive Accuracy in ROC
Curve.
Model
TPR
At 5%
FPR Improvement
At 10%
FPR Improvement
Proposed model 67.2% 84.2%
No-topic model 37.8% 29.4% 54.9% 29.3%
Top-50-word
model
54.9% 12.3% 70.5% 13.7%
LDA model 52.7% 14.5% 69.1% 15.1%
Notes: An ROC curve is a two-dimensional graph, plotting the TPR on the y-axis
against the FPR on the x-axis.
14 Journal of Marketing Research XX(X)

===PAGE BREAK===

estimation is reported in the first two columns. The AUC is the
highest for the proposed model, .945, an 11.4 % improvement
from the no-topic model in which text data is completely
ignored. The AUC for the proposed model also shows a notice-
able improvement on the top-50-word model by 4.0 % and the
LDA model by 4.1 %. We further extend the comparison of the
AUC to the out-of-sample predictions. The last two columns of
Table 10 report the AUC for the proposed model as .624, which
is 9.1% more than the no-topic model, 5.2 % more than the top-
50-word model, and 7.6 % more than the LDA model. These
out-of-sample measures again demonstrate the superior perfor-
mance of the proposed model.
Decision Implications
In this subsection, we discuss both generally and specifically
how firms can improve decision making using our model. At a
general level, we note that there has been sustained interest in
the marketing community in understanding consumer purchase
stages, dating back to the AIDA model (Howard and Sheth
1969; Strong 1925). The recent expansion in channels and
touchpoints has further heightened this interest (Lee et al.
2018; Lemon and Verhoef 2016). By providing more accurate
predictions of consumers’ latent positions on the purchase jour-
ney, our model can improve the efficiency of marketing deci-
sions that can be customized according to such positions. Next,
we illustrate the potential benefits of our model both qualita-
tively and quantitatively.
Our model can be used to improve the quality of down-
stream experiments. Firms now routinely perform A/B testing
to evaluate alternative decision options (e.g., price, promotion,
advertising creative), and the effectiveness of an option often
depends on a customer’s purchase stage (Hoban and Bucklin
2015; Zantedeschi, Feit, and Bradlow 2017). Because this stage
is typically latent, observed or derived proxies are often used in
empirical analyses. By improving predictive accuracy, our
model can reduce the biases in the proxies of consumers’ latent
purchase stages and in turn improve the quality of field experi-
ments and A/B tests.
To quantitatively assess the effect of improved predictive
accuracy on a firm’s revenue, we conduct a scenario analysis
following the setup in Trusov, Ma, and Jamal (2016). Assume
there is a simplified market of two segments—one segment of
top users (e.g., State 3 in our proposed model) whose
conversion rate is 1 % and the other segment of all other users
(e.g., States 1 and 2 in our proposed model) whose conversion
rate is .2 %. Assume the focal firm uses display ads to generate
traffic to its website with a fixed daily budget, and the cost per
thousand impressions, or cost-per-mille, for display ads is set at
$6.78, according to the industry statistics in the 4th quarter of
2019 (Statista 2020). In addition, we set the CTR to be .47 %,
which is the average CTR for the travel and hospitality industry
at Google Display Network in 2019 (Volovich 2020). Ideally,
firms hope to attract as many top users as possible. In reality,
however, they can achieve only certain precision in their iden-
tification of top users, which our model can facilitate with
better accuracy. The numeric illustration, detailed in Web
Appendix F, shows that, using the no-topic model as the bench-
mark, our proposed model can improve revenue by 45.7 %,
compared with an increase of 22.9 % by the LDA model and
a2 5 . 7% increase by the top-50-word model. Thus, the
increased predictive accuracy of our model can lead to a sub-
stantial increase in the firm’s revenue.
Predicting consumers’ purchase intentions is a central chal-
lenge for marketing managers. T herefore, the substantial
improvement in the predictive performance of our model has
significant implications. By using the semantic information
embedded in search phrases to help infer consumers’ positions
on their path to purchase, our model yields much improved
predictive performance compared with a model lacking any
textual information. Furthermore, our proposed model outper-
forms both the top-50-word benchmark model and the LDA
benchmark model, which indicates that the topic model is valu-
able in extracting information from textual data and that jointly
modeling visit and purchase decisions together with the topic
composition of consumer’s search phrases as in our proposed
model is more effective than using a standard LDA model in a
two-step manner. With its more accurate evaluation of consu-
mers’ current stage of purchase, improved prediction of pur-
chase probability, and informative latent topics in searches, our
model provides valuable inputs and guidance for making man-
agerial decisions.
Conclusion, Implications, and Limitations
Knowing what consumers are looking for at any given moment
is critical for marketing success. A variety of frameworks have
been proposed to understand the decision-making process and
the distinct stages along the consumer journey. However, an
important source of information along this path to purchase—
the large volume of search phrases used by consumers to gather
information from search engines—has been underutilized.
In this research, we develop an integrated modeling frame-
work that connects consumers’ search keywords to their chan-
nel visits and purchase decisions. We build two specifications
of the proposed framework, one in discrete state space and the
other in continuous state space, and show that the semantic
information contained in consumers’ search keywords is infor-
mative about consumers’ positions along the path to purchase.
We find that topic models, which have traditionally been used
Table 10. Comparison of AUC in ROC Curve.
In-Sample Out-of-Sample
Model AUC Improvement AUC Improvement
Proposed model .945 .624
No-topic model .848 11.4% .572 9.1%
Top-50-word model .909 4.0% .593 5.2%
LDA model .908 4.1% .580 7.6%
Notes: An ROC curve is a two-dimensional graph, plotting the TPR on the
y-axis against the FPR on the x-axis.
Li and Ma 15

===PAGE BREAK===

to analyze long text documents, are also effective in retrieving
semantic information from short search phrases. Applying our
model to a data set from the hospitality industry, we reveal
distinct and meaningful topics that underlie thousands of key-
word searches. More importantly, we show that once such
semantic information is connected to purchase decisions, firms
can significantly improve their inferences about consumers’
positions on the purchase journey. By leveraging such semantic
information, our proposed model not only outperforms existing
models that do not account for textual data but also leads to
more accurate assessments than a standard LDA model or
existing methods that make inferences on the basis of the pres-
ence of frequently used words.
Our model captures the dynamic trend in consumers’ chan-
nel choices and purchases. In particular, in an early state on the
purchase journey, consumers are more likely to use owned
channels, followed by earned and paid channels. As the con-
sumers move along their path to purchase, from the early state
to the middle state, the propen sity to visit owned channels
reaches its highest point while that for paid channels drops to
its lowest, whereas in the late state of purchase, consumers
have the lowest propensity to visit owned channels while the
propensity to visit paid channels is the highest among all states.
Despite the considerable heterogeneity in consumers’ topic
choices, we are able to identify a dynamic trend that consumers
are likely to begin by searching the loyalty and convenience
topics, and as they progress on their purchase journey they are
more likely to search for the economy and luxury topics. By
ignoring such dynamics in consumers’ search phrases, which
also reflect the dynamics in consumer demand, the firm could
miss opportunities to convert consumers who are close to mak-
ing a purchase. Our analysis als o reveals the relationship
between the firm’s subbrands and the topics searched by con-
sumers. These new findings provide insights for the firm to
evaluate its search campaign effectiveness and improve key-
word selection for search engine marketing.
Our study also reveals some more general and broader
insights. As one of the first empirical studies to leverage textual
data in understanding the consumer journey, we show that a
large volume of unstructured text data can be effectively asso-
ciated with consumers’ latent purchase states using topic mod-
els. We demonstrate the dynamics in the topics searched by
consumers when they travel through their path to purchase.
Furthermore, we show that incorporating textual information
using the proposed modeling f ramework can significantly
improve the accuracy of assessing consumers’ latent stages and
purchase likelihood.
Our analysis output can help managers enhance the perfor-
mance of their search engine marketing via improved keyword
selection. In a solution framework, the assessment of consu-
mers’ positions on their path to purchase would be an important
upstream component that feeds into downstream optimization
strategies. By extracting information from keyword searches to
help infer consumers’ positions in the purchase journey and
reveal their intention and preference expressed in their own
language, our model provides the essential intelligence for such
an initiative.
With adjustments, the proposed method can be applied to a
wide range of contexts involving textual information about
consumers’ position on the path to purchase. For example, in
addition to the textual data observed on search engines, our
model can be applied to consumers’ searches at a firm’s web-
site. Our model can also be applied to text data collected from
online chatting between consumers and customer representa-
tives, where consumers direct their queries to customer repre-
sentatives rather than search engines. Once we observe the text
submitted by consumers as well as the consumers’ visit touch-
points and purchases, we can integrate the data and apply our
model. In these scenarios, our model can be adjusted according
to the actual situation and provide insights and suggestions to
marketing managers.
Given the single data source and sample size of our data, the
generalizability of our substantive findings depends on the
research context and the exact data. That said, as the charac-
teristics of our data set are likely to be similar to those of the
data used by many managers for their decision making (i.e.,
they face the same set of issues of single source data), our
modeling framework is well suited to help managers improve
their understanding of consumers by using the information at
hand. Although our findings are closely tied to the focal firm’s
contextual background and the actual situation, the latent topics
we identify may be similar to those at other hotel chains. The
latent topics pursued by consumers and the dynamics of latent
topics from time to time can serve as important indicators for
marketing managers to track and evaluate, and the output can
be incorporated into the firm’s automated marketing planning
and allocation. Using clickstream data (Montgomery et al.
2004; Trusov, Ma, and Jamal 2016) or designing experiments
(Liu and Toubia 2018; Zantedeschi, Feit, and Bradlow 2017)
can supplement our research with insights regarding consu-
mers’ online browsing behaviors across multiple websites.
Our research has several limitations, some due to the model
and others due to data availability. Using a logit setup for
consumers’ decisions on topics, visits, and purchases, our
model assumes the conditiona l independence among these
three decisions, without accounting for the correlations among
the error terms. Future research could enrich our parsimonious
model with correlated errors and alternative model setups.
Our research is also limited by the nature and structure of
our data. For example, we do not observe the impressions in
any visit channels, which is a weakness of our data that dam-
pens our model performance. On a related note, our data con-
tains only consumers’ online t ouchpoints. Integrating the
offline channels and touchpoints such as visits and purchases
made in person or through phone calls can further improve
predictions and insights regarding omnichannel shopping beha-
vior (Ansari, Mela, and Neslin 2008; Danaher et al. 2020;
Verhoef, Kannan, and Inman 2015). Moreover, it is possible
the firm is conducting marketing campaigns in some untracked
channels (e.g., magazine print ads) or in tracked channels
where data is lost due to consumers’ deletion of cookie IDs
16 Journal of Marketing Research XX(X)

===PAGE BREAK===

or switching of devices. To reduce the dimension of para-
meters, we have grouped the marketing channels into paid,
owned, and earned categories. Some insights could be aggre-
gated out when we combine channels. Another limitation is that
we do not observe all marketing interventions such as promo-
tions and discounts, without which we cannot offer specific
insight into a particular channel or campaign or conduct coun-
terfactual analyses. Field experiments may be helpful in future
studies to validate the effectiveness of various promotion tech-
niques for consumers at differ ent positions of the purchase
funnel. In addition, our data set does not contain demographic
information, which is commonly used for segmentation analy-
sis. Incorporating such information could help identify the dif-
ferent journeys taken by different consumers. Furthermore, our
data set does not contain the exact products consumers browsed
or the price presented on each visit, which, if available, could
help further connect the search keywords to consumers’ other
information gathering activities. Finally, our data contain only
the observations of search phrases typed by the consumers at
search engines. We do not observe consumers’ search terms at
the firm’s own website or third-party referral websites. Should
such data become available, it would be straightforward to
incorporate it into the proposed model. This offers avenues for
future research that could extend our substantive findings with
more textual information.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the Editor and the review team for their valuable
guidance and suggestions throughout the review process. They also
thank P.K. Kannan and seminar participants at Dartmouth College, the
Ohio State University, Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business,
Marketing Dynamics Conference, University of Houston, Erasmus
University, and Washington University in St. Louis for their helpful
comments on previous versions of this article.
Associate Editor
Gerard Tellis
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Alice Li
acknowledges support from Adobe Inc. via Adobe Digital Marketing
Research Award and support from Fisher College of Business via
Small Grant. Both authors thank the National Center of the Middle
Market for providing a research grant.
ORCID iD
Hongshuang (Alice) Li https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8752-690X
References
Ansari, Asim, Carl F. Mela, and Scott A. Neslin (2008), “Customer
Channel Migration,” Journal of Marketing Research ,4 5( 1 ) ,
60–76.
Berger, Jonah, Ashlee Humphreys, Stephan Ludwig, Wendy W. Moe,
Oded Netzer, and David A. Schweidel (2020), “Uniting the Tribes:
Using Text for Marketing Insight,” Journal of Marketing , 84 (1),
1–25.
Blei, David M. and John D. Lafferty (2007), “A Correlated Topic
Model of Science,” Annals of Applied Statistics , 1 (1), 17–35.
Blei, David M., Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan (2003), “Latent
Dirichlet Allocation,” Journal of Machine Learning Research ,3 ,
993–1022.
Bu¨schken, Joachim and Greg M. Allenby (2016), “Sentence-Based
Text Analysis for Customer Reviews,” Marketing Science ,3 5
(6), 953–75.
Bu¨schken, Joachim and Greg M. Allenby (2020), “Improving Text
Analysis Using Sentence Conjunctions and Punctuation,” Market-
ing Science , 39 (4), 727–42.
Colicev, Anatoli, Ashish Kumar, and Peter O’Connor (2019),
“Modeling the Relationship Between Firm and User Generated
Content and the Stages of the Marketing Funnel,” International
Journal of Research in Marketing , 36 (1), 100–116.
Court, David, Dave Elzinga, Susan Mulder, and Ole Jorgen Vetvik
(2009), “The Consumer Decision Journey,” McKinsey Quarterly
(June), https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/marketing-
and-sales/our-insights/the-consumer-decision-journey.
Danaher, Peter J., Tracy S. Danaher, Michael S. Smith, and Ruben
Loaiza-Maya (2020), “Advertising Effectiveness for Multiple
Retailer-Brands in a Multimedia and Multichannel environment,”
Journal of Marketing Research , 57 (3), 455–67.
Du, Rex Y. and Wagner A. Kamakura (2006), “Household Life Cycles
and Lifestyles in the United States,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 43 (1), 121–32.
Geweke, John (1991), “Evaluating the Accuracy of Sampling-Based
Approaches to the Calculation of Posterior Moments,” Vol. 96.
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Ghose, Anindya and Sha Yang (2009), “An Empirical Analysis of
Search Engine Advertising: Sponsored Search in Electronic Mar-
kets,” Management Science , 55 (10), 1605–22.
Gong, Jing, Vibhanshu Abhishek, and Beibei Li (2018), “Examining
the Impact of Keyword Ambiguity on Search Advertising Perfor-
mance: A Topic Model Approach,” MIS Quarterly, 42 (3), 805–30.
Hamilton, Rebecca and Linda L. Price (2019), “Consumer Journeys:
Developing Consumer-Based Strategy,” Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science , 47 (2), 187–91.
Hoban, Paul R. and Randolph E. Bucklin (2015), “Effects of Internet
Display Advertising in the Purchase Funnel: Model-Based Insights
from a Randomized Field Experiment,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 52(3), 375–93.
Howard, John A. and Jagdish N. Sheth (1969), The Theory of Buyer
Behavior. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Jerath, Kinshuk, Liye Ma, and Young-Hoon Park (2014), “Consumer
Click Behavior at a Search Engine: The Role of Keyword
Popularity,” Journal of Marketing Research , 51 (4), 480–86.
Li and Ma 17

===PAGE BREAK===

Joo, Mingyu, Kenneth C. Wilbur, Bo Cowgill, and Yi Zhu (2013),
“Television Advertising and Online Search,” Management Sci-
ence, 60 (1), 56–73.
Lee, Leonard, J. Jeffrey Inman, Jennifer J. Argo, Tim Bo ¨ttger, Utpal
Dholakia, Timothy Gilbride, et al. (2018), “From Browsing to
Buying and Beyond: The Needs-Adaptive Shopper Journey Model,”
Journal of the Association for Consumer Research, 3 (3), 277–93.
Lee, Thomas Y. and Eric T. Bradlow (2011), “Automated Marketing
Research Using Online Customer Reviews,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 48 (5), 881–94.
Lemon, Katherine N. and Peter C. Verhoef (2016), “Understanding
Customer Experience Throughout the Customer Journey,” Journal
of Marketing, 80 (6), 69–96.
Li, Hongshuang (Alice) and P.K. Kannan (2014), “Attributing Con-
versions in a Multichannel Online Marketing Environment: An
Empirical Model and a Field Experiment,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 51 (1), 40–56.
Li, Hongshuang (Alice), P.K. Ka nnan, Siva Viswanathan, and
Abhishek Pani (2016), “Attribution Strategies and Return on Key-
word Investment in Paid Search Advertising,” Marketing Science,
35 (6), 831–48.
Li, Jingjing, Ahmed Abbasi, Amar Cheema, and Linda B. Abraham
(2020), “Path to Purpose? How Online Customer Journeys Differ
for Hedonic Versus Utilitarian Purchases,” Journal of Marketing ,
84 (4), 127–46
Li, Lin, Guandong Xu, Zhenglu Yang, Peter Dolog, Yanchun Zhang,
and Masaru Kitsuregawa (2013), “An Efficient Approach to Sug-
gesting Topically Related Web Queries Using Hidden Topic Mod-
el,” World Wide Web , 16 (3), 273–97.
Li, Shibo, Baohong Sun, and Alan L. Montgomery (2011), “Cross-
Selling the Right Product to the Right Customer at the Right
Time,” Journal of Marketing Research , 48 (4), 683–700.
Liu, Jia and Olivier Toubia (2018), “A Semantic Approach for Esti-
mating Consumer Content Preferences from Online Search Quer-
ies,” Marketing Science , 37 (6), 930–52.
Lu, Shijie and Sha Yang (2017), “Investigating the Spillover Effect of
Keyword Market Entry in Sponsored Search Advertising,” Mar-
keting Science , 36 (6), 976–98.
Ma, Liye, Baohong Sun, and Sunder Kekre (2015), “The Squeaky
Wheel Gets the Grease: An Empirical Analysis of Customer Voice
and Firm Intervention on Twitter,” Marketing Science ,3 4( 5 ) ,
627–45.
Manchanda, Puneet, Jean-Pierre Dub´e, Khim Yong Goh, and Pradeep
K. Chintagunta (2006), “The Effect of Banner Advertising on
Internet Purchasing,” Journal of Marketing Research ,4 3( 1 ) ,
98–108.
Melnyk, Valentyna, Kristina Klein, and Franziska Vo ¨lckner (2012),
“The Double-Edged Sword of Foreign Brand Names for Compa-
nies from Emerging Countries,” Journal of Marketing ,7 6( 6 ) ,
21–37.
Moe, Wendy W. and Peter S. Fader (2004), “Dynamic Conversion
Behavior at E-Commerce Sites,” Management Science ,5 0( 3 ) ,
326–35.
Montgomery, Alan L., Shibo Li, Kannan Srinivasan, and John C.
Liechty (2004), “Modeling Online Browsing and Path Analysis
Using Clickstream Data,” Marketing Science , 23 (4), 579–95.
Netzer, Oded, James M. Lattin, and Vikram Srinivasan (2008),
“A Hidden Markov Model of Customer Relationship Dynamics,”
Marketing Science , 27 (2), 185–204.
Netzer, Oded, Ronen Feldman, Jacob Goldenberg, and Moshe Fresko
(2012), “Mine Your Own Business: Market-Structure Surveillance
Through Text Mining,” Marketing Science , 31 (3), 521–43.
Novak, Thomas P., Donna L. Hoffman, and Adam Duhachek (2003),
“The Influence of Goal-Directed and Experiential Activities on
Online Flow Experiences,” Journal of Consumer Psychology ,1 3
(1/2), 3–16.
Rutz, Oliver J. and Randolph E. Bucklin (2011), “From Generic to
Branded: A Model of Spillover Dynamics in Paid Search Adver-
tising,” Journal of Marketing Research , 48 (1), 87–102.
Schweidel, David A., Eric T. Bradlow, and Peter S. Fader (2011),
“Portfolio Dynamics for Customers of a Multiservice Provider,”
Management Science , 57 (3), 471–86.
Statista (2020), “Social Media A dvertising Cost-Per-Mille (CPM)
Worldwide from 2nd Quarter 2018 to 4th Quarter 2019,” (accessed
May 18, 2020), https://www.statista.com/statistics/873631/social-
media-advertising-cpm/.
Stephen, Andrew T. and Jeff Galak (2012), “The Effects of Traditional
and Social Earned Media on Sales: A Study of a Microlending
Marketplace,” Journal of Marketing Research , 49 (5), 624–39.
Strong, Edward K., Jr. (1925), The Psychology of Selling and Adver-
tising. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Taniguchi, Nina (2019), “Same Search Terms, Different Emotions:
Anticipate Customer Needs Throughout the Journey,” Think with
Google (October), https://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/consumer-
insights/search-intent-and-customer-needs/.
Tirunillai, Seshadri and Gerard J. Tellis (2014), “Mining Marketing
Meaning from Online Chatter: Strategic Brand Analysis of Big
Data Using Latent Dirichlet Allocation,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 51 (4), 463–79.
Trusov, Michael, Liye Ma, and Zainab Jamal (2016), “Crumbs of the
Cookie: User Profiling in Customer-Base Analysis and Behavioral
Targeting,” Marketing Science , 35 (3), 405–26.
VanBoskirk, Shar, Brandon Verblow, Keith Johnston, Brigitte
Majewski, Alex Sobchuk, and Rachel Birrell (2019), “The US
Digital Marketing Forecast, 2018 to 2023,” Forrester Research
(February 7), https://www. forrester.com /report/The þUS þ
DigitalþMarketingþForecastþ2018þToþ2023/-/E-RES142558.
Verhoef, Peter, P.K. Kannan, a nd Jeffrey Inman (2015), “From
Multi-Channel Retailing to Omni-Channel Retailing: Introduction
to the Special Issue on Mu lti-Channel Retailing,” Journal of
Retailing, 91 (2), 174–81.
Volovich, Kristina (2020), “What’s a Good Clickthrough Rate? New
Benchmark Data for Google AdWords,” HubSpot (January 7),
https://blog.hubspot.com/age ncy/google-adwords-benchmark-
data.
Wu, Qingqiang, Caidong Zhang, Qingqi Hong, and Liyan Chen
(2014), “Topic Evolution Based on LDA and HMM and Its Appli-
cation in Stem Cell Research,” Journal of Information Science ,4 0
(5), 611–20.
Zantedeschi, Daniel, Eleanor McDonnell Feit, and Eric T. Bradlow
(2017), “Measuring Multichannel Advertising Response,” Man-
agement Science , 63 (8), 2706–28.
18 Journal of Marketing Research XX(X)