American Economic Review 2012, 102(5): 2183–2205
http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.5.2183
2183
Revealed preference is one of the most influential ideas in economics and has been 
applied to a number of areas of economics, including consumer theory.1 According 
to standard revealed preference theory, x is revealed to be preferred to y if and only 
if x is chosen when y is also available (Samuelson 1938). Any choice reversal, there-
fore, observed both empirically and experimentally, is attributed to irrationality 
since it cannot be expressed as a preference maximization.
The revealed preference argument relies on the implicit assumption that a deci-
sion maker (DM) considers all feasible alternatives. Without the full consideration 
assumption, the standard revealed preference method can be misleading. It is possi-
ble that the DM prefers x to y but she chooses y when x is present simply because she 
does not realize that x is also available (Hausman 2008). For example, while using 
a search engine, a DM might only pay attention to alternatives appearing on the first 
page of the results since it takes too much time to consider all the search results. She 
then picks the best alternative of those on the first page, say y. It is possible that her 
most preferred item, x, does not appear on the first page. Therefore we, as outside 
observers, cannot conclude that y is better than x even though y is chosen when x is 
1 Varian (2006) provides a nice survey of revealed preference analysis.
Revealed Attention†
By Yusufcan Masatlioglu, Daisuke Nakajima, and Erkut Y . Ozbay*
The standard revealed preference argument relies on an implicit 
assumption that a decision maker considers all feasible alternatives. 
The marketing and psychology literatures, however, provide well-
established evidence that consumers do not consider all brands in a 
given market before making a purchase (Limited Attention). In this 
paper, we illustrate how one can deduce both the decision maker’s 
preference and the alternatives to which she pays attention and inat-
tention from the observed behavior. We illustrate how seemingly com-
pelling welfare judgments without specifying the underlying choice 
procedure are misleading. Further, we provide a choice theoretical 
foundation for maximizing a single preference relation under limited 
attention. (JEL D11, D81)
* Masatlioglu: University of Michigan, Department of Economics, 611 Tappan Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 
(e-mail: yusufcan@umich.edu); Nakajima: University of Michigan, Department of Economics, 611 Tappan Street, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 (e-mail: nakajima@umich.edu); Ozbay: University of Maryland, Department of Economics, 
3105 Tydings Hall, College Park, MD 20742 (e-mail: ozbay@umd.edu). We would like to thank Tilman Börgers, 
Kfir Eliaz, Emel Filiz-Ozbay, Chris House, Stephan Lauermann, Paola Manzini, Marco Mariotti, Collin Raymond, 
Lones Smith, Rani Spiegler, and Neslihan Uler for their helpful comments. Valuable comments were also received 
from numerous seminar and conference participants. Masatlioglu and Nakajima thank the National Science 
Foundation for financial support under Grant SES-1024544.
† To view additional materials, visit the article page at http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.5.2183.
Contents
Revealed Attention† 2183
I. The Model 2187
A. Attention Filters 2187
B. Choice with Limited Attention 2189
II. Revealed Preference and (In)Attention 2189
III. Characterization 2193
IV . Anomalies 2196
V . Further Comments on Revealed Preference 2199
VI. Conclusion 2200
Appendix: Proofs 2201
REFERENCES 2203

===PAGE BREAK===

2184 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW AugusT 2012
available. Nevertheless, as in the above example, the DM may have a well-defined 
preference and is maximizing her preference within her bounded understanding of 
what is available.
2
This example immediately raises a question: how can we elicit her (stable) pref-
erence without the full attention assumption? We consider a DM who picks her 
most preferred item from the alternatives she pays attention to, not from the entire 
feasible set. Then we shall illustrate when and how one can deduce both the DM’s 
preferences and the alternatives to which she does or does not pay attention from her 
observed choices. Furthermore, we illustrate the problem of the welfare judgment 
without specifying the underlying choice procedure by showing an example where 
our method and the conservative criterion of Bernheim and Rangel (2007, 2009) 
result in the completely opposite implication.
The marketing literature calls the set of alternatives to which a DM pays attention 
in her choice process the consideration set (Wright and Barbour 1977). The forma-
tion of the consideration set has been studied extensively in the marketing and finance 
literatures (e.g., Hauser and Wernerfelt 1990; Roberts and Lattin 1991). It has been 
argued that due to cognitive limitations, DMs cannot pay attention to all the available 
alternatives. As Simon (1957) pointed out, being able to consider all possible alterna-
tives is as hard as comparing them for decision makers. Therefore, a DM with limited 
cognitive capacity (possibly stemming from unawareness, as demonstrated in Goeree 
2008
3), restricts her attention to only a small fraction of the objects present in the asso-
ciated market (Stigler 1961; Pessemier 1978; Chiang, Chib, and Narasimhan 1999).4 
In sum, a DM intentionally or unintentionally filters out some alternatives to prevent 
her cognitive capacity from being overloaded (Broadbent 1958).
The common property in the formation of consideration sets is that it is unaffected 
when an alternative she does not pay attention to becomes unavailable. This basic 
property of the attention filter, which is also documented in the psychology litera-
ture (Broadbent 1958), can be interpreted as the minimal condition. This property 
is trivially satisfied in classical choice theory where it is assumed that the DM is 
able to pay attention to all the available alternatives. Additionally, it is normatively 
appealing especially when a DM pays attention to all of the items she is aware of 
and is unaware that she is unaware of other items. For example, if a personal com-
puter (PC) buyer is not only unaware of a particular PC, but she is also unaware that 
she overlooks that PC, then, even when that PC becomes unavailable, she will not 
recognize such a change. Therefore, her consideration set will stay the same.
Interestingly, this property is also satisfied when the DM actually chooses the 
consideration sets by taking the cost of investigation and the expected benefit 
into account. Suppose the DM excludes x from her consideration. If x becomes 
unavailable, she has no reason to add or remove any alternative to her consider -
ation set because she could have done so when x was available. Therefore, her 
2 As argued in Aumann (2005), this behavior is still considered rational (at least boundedly rational) since she is 
choosing the best alternative under her limited information about what is available.
3 Lavidge and Steiner (1961) presented awareness of an item as a necessary condition to be in the consideration 
set. How unawareness alters the behavior of the DM has been studied in various contexts such as game theory 
(Heifetz, Meier, and Schipper 2010; Ozbay 2008), and contract theory (Filiz-Ozbay 2010).
4 In addition, in financial economics it is shown that investors reach a decision within their limited attention 
(Huberman and Regev 2001). Similar examples can be found in job search (Richards, Sheridan, and Slocum 1975), 
university choice (Dawes and Brown 2005), and airport choice (Basar and Bhat 2004).

===PAGE BREAK===

2185MAsATLIOgLu ET AL.: REVEALEd ATTENTIONVOL. 102 NO. 5
 consideration set is not affected when x becomes unavailable. Furthermore, this 
property is also satisfied when the formation is based on many decision heuristics, 
such as paying attention only to the N-most advertised alternatives or the products 
appearing in the first page of search results. As a result, our property is appealing 
from both normative and descriptive point of views.
In this paper, we refer to the consideration sets satisfying this property as attention 
filters. Under this structure, it is possible to elicit the DM’s preference whenever a 
choice reversal is observed.
5 For example, assume that she chooses x, but removing 
y changes her choice. This can happen only when her consideration set has changed. 
This would be impossible if she did not pay attention to y. Hence, y must have 
been considered (Revealed Attention). Given the fact that x is chosen while y draws 
her attention, we conclude that she prefers x over y (Revealed Preference). In sum, 
whenever her choice changes as a consequence of removing an unchosen alterna-
tive, the initially chosen alternative is preferred to the removed one.
Given that our identification strategy relies on the particular choice procedure, 
where she maximizes her preference within her attention filter, it is natural to ask the 
falsifiability of our model. We show that our model is fully characterized by weak-
ening the Weak Axiom of the Revealed Preference (W ARP). This result renders our 
model behaviorally testable.
Our method to distinguish between a preference and attention/ inattention gener-
ates several policy implications. For instance, if a product of a firm is unpopular in 
the marketplace, there could be two different explanations: (i) the product has a low 
evaluation by consumers; or (ii) it does not attract attention of consumers. Identifying 
the right reason will lead to different strategies for the firm to improve sales.
Our paper also contributes to the recent discussion about welfare analysis under 
nonstandard individual behavior.
6 We elicit the DM’s preference in a positive 
approach, which is based on a particular choice procedure. Bernheim and Rangel 
(2009) criticize such an approach by arguing that it is not necessary to explain 
the behavior to make a welfare analysis. Instead, they make welfare arguments 
directly from the choice data without assuming any choice procedure (model-free). 
Particularly, they claim that y is strictly welfare-improving over x if y is sometimes 
chosen when x is available but x is never chosen when y is present. This intuitive 
criterion of welfare analysis is meaningful, however, only if the DM considers all 
the presented alternatives.
7 In Section II, we discuss this issue in detail to illustrate 
the problem of the naive use of the model-free approach. Indeed, we provide an 
example where their welfare implication contradicts our revealed preference (hence 
the actual preference); that is, y is revealed to be preferred to x even when x is strictly 
welfare-improving over y in the sense of Bernheim and Rangel (2009).
So far we have discussed how one can elicit DM’s preference and consider -
ation sets in our model. In doing so, we impose a relatively weak condition on the 
5 Without any structure on the formation of the consideration sets, any choice behavior can be rationalized by 
any preference (Hausman 2008).
6 See Ambrus and Rozen (2010); Apesteguia and Ballester (2010); Cherepanov, Feddersen, and Sandroni (2010); 
Chambers and Hayashi (2008); Green and Hojman (2007); Manzini and Mariotti (forthcoming); Masatlioglu and 
Nakajima (2009); Noor (2011); Rubinstein and Salant (2012).
7 Indeed, Bernheim and Rangel (2007) mention that if we know the DM believes that she is choosing from a set 
that is other than the objective feasible set, we should take it into account for the welfare analysis (Section IIIB).

===PAGE BREAK===

2186 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW AugusT 2012
 formation of consideration sets so that our approach is applicable to a wide range 
of choice data. As a result, although our model is refutable, it provides an alterna-
tive explanation for several frequently observed behaviors that cannot be captured 
by the standard choice theory: Attraction Effect, Cyclical Choice, and Choosing 
Pairwisely Unchosen (see Section IV). Our explanations for these choice patterns 
depend solely on limited attention, hence seemingly irrational behaviors can be 
explained without introducing changing preference. Nevertheless, depending on the 
intended application, it is possible to analyze this framework under different restric-
tions on consideration sets.
There are several related models where the final choice is made after eliminat-
ing several items, which can be interpreted as a choice with limited consideration 
such as applying a rationale to eliminate alternatives (Manzini and Mariotti 2007; 
Apesteguia and Ballester 2009; Houy 2007; Houy and Tadenuma 2009), consider -
ing only the N-most eye-catching alternatives (Salant and Rubinstein 2008), focus-
ing only on alternatives a decision maker can rationalize to choose by some other 
criterion (Cherepanov, Feddersen, and Sandroni 2010), and considering only alter -
natives belonging to undominated categories (Manzini and Mariotti forthcoming). 
Our model is both descriptively and behaviorally distinct from these models. In 
addition, unlike our model, these models implicitly assume that a DM considers all 
feasible alternatives at the first stage and intentionally eliminates several alterna-
tives. Therefore, their stories are not applicable to cases where the source of limited 
consideration is unawareness of some alternatives.
Finally, we would like to compare our model to several other models involving 
consideration sets in decision theory. Lleras et al. (2010) study a different model of 
choice under limited consideration where a product attracting attention on a crowded 
supermarket shelf will be noticed when there are fewer products.
8 Masatlioglu and 
Nakajima (2009) propose a model of an iterative search where a decision maker can-
not consider all alternatives, which can be because of unawareness like our model. 
The difference is that they emphasize that a consideration set depends on the initial 
starting point and evolves dynamically during the course of search. In the models of 
Caplin and Dean (2011), and Caplin, Dean, and Martin (2011), a DM goes through 
alternatives sequentially and, at any given time, chooses the best one among those 
she has searched. Unlike our model, their “choice process” data includes not only 
the DM’s choice without time limit, but also what she would choose if she were sud-
denly forced to quit the search at any given time.
Eliaz and Spiegler (2011) analyze a market where firms would like to manipulate 
consumers’ consideration sets by using costly marketing devices. Eliaz, Richter, and 
Rubinstein (2011) study a very concrete and reasonable way to construct a consider-
ation set. Indeed, some of the consideration sets we shall present as examples are within 
their models. Contrary to our model, however, in their paper, the DM’s consideration 
set (called finalists) is observed and is directly investigated. In our model the consider-
ation set is an object that must be inferred from the DM’s final choice.
The outline of this paper is as follows:  Section I introduces the basic notations 
and definitions. In Section II, we provide two characterizations for the revealed 
8 While this paper is complementary to our paper, their implications are completely different. We discuss it in 
the Section VI.

===PAGE BREAK===

2187MAsATLIOgLu ET AL.: REVEALEd ATTENTIONVOL. 102 NO. 5
 preference and the revealed (in)attention from observed choice data. Section III 
provides a simple behavioral test for our model and discusses the related literature. 
Then, in Section IV , we illustrate that our limited attention model is capable of 
accommodating several frequently observed behaviors. Finally, Sections V and VI 
conclude the paper.
I. The Model
Throughout this paper, let X be a finite set of alternatives that may be available for a 
DM to choose;  denotes the set of all nonempty subsets of X, which is interpreted as 
the collection of all the (objective) feasible sets observed by a third party.
A. Attention Filters
In our model, a DM picks the best element from those she pays attention to (her con-
sideration set). Our goal is to elicit her preference along with her attention and inatten-
tion from her actual choice data. This is impossible, however, without any knowledge 
about her attention and inattention. One can always claim that she picks an alternative 
because she ignores everything else, so one cannot infer her preference at all.
We now propose a property of how consideration sets change as feasible sets 
change, instead of explicitly modeling how the feasible set determines the con-
sideration set. This approach makes it possible to apply our method to elicit the 
preference without relying on a particular formation of the consideration set. We 
shall explain that this property is normatively compelling in several situations and is 
indeed true in many heuristics people actually use in real life.
Let s be a feasible set the DM is facing. She does not pay attention to all alterna-
tives in s. Let Γ(s ) be the (nonempty) set of elements to which she pays attention. 
Formally, Γ is a mapping from  to  with ~ ≠ Γ(s ) ⊂ s. We call Γ a consideration 
set mapping. Of all consideration set mappings, we focus on those having the fol-
lowing property:
DEFINITION 1: A consideration set mapping Γ is an attention filter if for any s, 
Γ(s ) = Γ(s \ x) whenever x ∉ Γ(s ).
9
This definition says that if an alternative does not attract the attention of the deci-
sion maker, her consideration set does not change when such an item becomes 
unavailable.
To illustrate that this is a normatively appealing property, we shall provide two 
examples where the DM’s consideration set mapping should be an attention filter. 
The first example is based on unawareness. Imagine a DM (wrongly) believes Γ(s ) 
is her feasible set (s is the actual one). That is, she is not only unaware of alternatives 
in s \ Γ(s ) but unaware that she is unaware of these alternatives. If so, she will not 
recognize the change of the feasible set when such an item becomes unavailable, so 
her consideration set should not change. This is exactly what the property dictates.
9 Throughout the paper, unless it leads to confusion, we abuse the notation by suppressing set delimiters, e.g., 
writing c(x y) instead of c({x, y}) or Γ(x y) instead of Γ({x, y}) or s \ x instead of s \ {x}.

===PAGE BREAK===

2188 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW AugusT 2012
The second one is choosing rationally what to consider (or not to consider). Because 
of scarcity of time and/or complexity of decision problems, a DM focuses selectively 
on a smaller set of alternatives and ignores the rest. Suppose she knows s is her entire 
feasible set. Then, she picks her consideration set Γ(s ) based optimally on her prior 
beliefs about the value of alternatives and the cost of inspecting them. Then, her con-
sideration set mapping must satisfy our property. To see this, imagine that she consid-
ers only a and b when her feasible set is {a, b, c, d } 
(Γ(abcd ) = {a, b}). Assume that d 
becomes unavailable now. She has no reason to add c to her consideration set because 
she could have done so when d was available. For the same reason, it is not rational 
to remove b (or a ) from her consideration set. Therefore, it must be Γ(abc) = {a, b}. 
That is, her consideration set mapping is an attention filter. Notice that this must be 
true whatever beliefs and cost function she has.
10
Furthermore, in addition to being normatively appealing, our condition is also 
descriptively appealing. Many heuristics that are actually used to narrow down the 
set of choosable options generate attention filters. We list some of them.
Top N: A DM considers only top N alternatives according to some criterion that is 
different from her preference. For instance:
	 •	 Consider	 only	the	three	cheapest	suppliers	in	the	market	(Dulleck et al. 2008).
	 •	 Consider	the	N-most advertised products in the market.
	 •	 Consider	 the	products	that	appear	on	the	first	page	of	the	web	search	and/or 
sponsored links (Hotchkiss et al. 2004).
	 •	 Consider	 the	first	N available alternatives according to an exogenously given 
order (Salant and Rubinstein 2008).11
Top on each criterion:  A DM has several criteria and considers only the best 
alternative(s) on each criterion (modeled as a complete and transitive binary rela-
tion). For instance:
	 •	 Consider	 only	a	job	candidate	if	she	is	the	best	in	a	program.	Or	consider	the	
top-two job candidates from all first-tier schools and the top candidate from 
second-tier schools.
	 •	 Consider	 only	the	cheapest	car,	the	safest	car,	and	the	most	fuel-efficient	car	
on the market.
12
10 The only exception is that the feasible set itself conveys some information that affects her belief or cost 
function.
11 Salant and Rubinstein (2008) characterizes this class of choice functions by assuming N is observable.
12 This heuristic is very close to the “Rationalization” of Cherepanov, Feddersen, and Sandroni (2010). Indeed, it 
is a special version of Rationalization. In their model, unlike “the top on each criterion,” depending on the feasible 
set, different sets of criteria might be utilized to eliminate alternatives in the first stage. See Section III for further 
discussion.

===PAGE BREAK===

2189MAsATLIOgLu ET AL.: REVEALEd ATTENTIONVOL. 102 NO. 5
Most popular category: A DM considers alternatives that belong to the most pop-
ular “category” in the market. For instance:
	 •	 There	 are	several	bike	shops	in	the	DM’s	town.	The	DM	first	checks	online	
to find the store offering the largest variety of bikes and goes to that store. 
Therefore, the DM only considers bikes sold in the selected store. 13 Zyman 
(1999) provides real-world evidence for such behavior. The sale of Sprite is 
increased dramatically when it is simply repositioned from the category of 
lemon-limes (less popular category) to soda (more popular category).
B. Choice with Limited Attention
In the previous subsection, we defined the concept of the attention filter and dis-
cussed features that make it both normatively and descriptively appealing. Now we 
define the choice behavior of a DM who picks the best element from her consid-
eration set according to the complete and transitive preference. Formally, a choice 
function assigns a unique element to each feasible set. That is, c :  → X with 
c(s ) ∈ s for all s ∈ .
DEFINITION 2: A choice function c is a choice with limited attention (CLA) if 
there exists a complete and transitive preference ≻ over X and an attention filter Γ 
such that c(s ) is the ≻-best element in Γ(s ).
14
In the following sections, we answer the following questions under the assump-
tion that a DM follows a choice with limited attention but her preference and atten-
tion filter is not observable: (i) How can we identify her preference and attention 
filter through her choice data? (ii) Which choice functions are compatible with the 
model of a choice with limited attention?
II. Revealed Preference and (In)Attention
In this section, we illustrate how to infer ( i) the DM’s preference and ( ii) what 
the DM pays ( and does not pay)  attention to from her observed choice that is a 
CLA. The standard theory concludes that x is preferred to y when x is chosen 
while y is available. To justify such an inference, one must assume implicitly that 
she has paid attention to y . Without this hidden assumption, we cannot make any 
inference because she may prefer y  but overlooks it. Therefore, eliciting the DM’s 
preference is no longer trivial because her choice can be attributed to her prefer -
ence or to her inattention. 15
13 For instance, suppose store A deals with Makers 1 and 2’s bikes while store B sells bikes from Makers 2 and 
3. Then, the DM compares the number of Makers 1 and 2’s bikes with that of Makers 2 and 3’s to choose which 
store to visit.
14 That is, c(s ) ∈ Γ(s ) and c(s ) ≻ x for all x ∈ Γ(s ) \ c(s ).
15 In the extreme case where the choice data satisfy the weak axiom of revealed preference, we have no way of 
knowing whether the DM is aware of all alternatives and maximizing a particular preference, or whether she only 
pays attention to the one she chooses. In the latter, her preference has no significant importance. In Section V , we 
discuss the situations where one can pin down the preference even in this extreme case.

===PAGE BREAK===

2190 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW AugusT 2012
This observation suggests that multiple pairs of a preference and an attention filter 
can generate the same choice behavior. To illustrate this, consider the choice func-
tion with three elements exhibiting a cycle:
 c(x yz) = x, c(x y) = x, c(yz) = y, c(xz) = z.
One possibility is that the DM’s preference is z  ≻ 1  x  ≻ 1  y and she overlooks z both at 
{x, y, z} and { y, z}. Another possibility is that her preference is x  ≻ 2  y  ≻ 2  z and she does 
not pay attention to x only at {x, z} (see Table 1 for the corresponding attention filters).
We cannot identify which of them is her true preference. Nevertheless, if only 
these two pairs represent c, we can unambiguously conclude that she prefers x to 
y because both of them rank x above y. For the same reason, we can infer that she 
pays attention to both x and y at {x, y, z} (Table 1). This example makes it clear that 
we need to define revealed preference when multiple representations are possible.
DEFINITION 3: Assume c is a choice by limited attention and there are k different 
pairs of preference and attention filter representing c, ( Γ 
1 ,  ≻ 1 ), ( Γ 2 ,  ≻ 2 ), … , ( Γ k ,  ≻ k ). 
In this case,
 • x is revealed to be preferred to y if x  ≻ i  y  for all i,
 • x is revealed to attract attention at s if  Γ i  (s ) includes x for all i,
 • x is revealed not to attract attention at s if  Γ i  (s ) excludes x for all i.
This definition is very conservative: we say x is revealed to be preferred to y only 
when all possible representations agree on it. We do not want to make any false 
claims or claims that we are not sure are true. This conservative approach makes it 
possible that a social planner is always safe to follow our welfare recommendations.
If one wants to know whether x is revealed to be preferred to y, it would appear 
necessary to check for every ( Γ 
i  ,  ≻ i ) whether it represents her choice or not. This 
is not practical, however, especially when there are many alternatives. Instead we 
shall now provide a handy method to obtain the revealed preference, attention, and 
inattention completely.
In the example above, when Γ is an attention filter, it is possible to determine the 
relative ranking between x and y. To see this, note that if the DM pays attention to x 
and z at both {x, z} and {x, y, z}, then we should not observe choice reversal. If there is 
a choice reversal, then this means that her attention set changes when y  is removed 
from {x, y, z}. This is possible only when she pays attention to y at {x, y, z} (Revealed 
Table 1—Two Possible Representations for the Cyclical Choice
Attention filter
Preference  {x, y, z}  {x, y}  { y, z}  {x, z}
z  ≻ 1  x  ≻ 1  y  Γ 1 x y x y y x z
x  ≻ 2  y  ≻ 2  z  Γ 2 x yz x y yz z

===PAGE BREAK===

2191MAsATLIOgLu ET AL.: REVEALEd ATTENTIONVOL. 102 NO. 5
Attention). Given the fact that x is chosen from {x, y, z} we conclude that the DM prefers 
x over y (Revealed Preference). This observation can be easily generalized. Whenever 
the choices change as a consequence of removing an alternative, the initially chosen 
alternative is preferred to the removed one. Formally, for any distinct x and y, define:
(1) x Py if there exists T such that c(T ) = x ≠ c(T \ y).
By the argument analogous to the one above, if x Py then x is revealed to be pre-
ferred to y. In addition, since the underlying preferences are transitive, we also con-
clude that she prefers x to z if x Py and yPz for some y, even when x Pz is not revealed 
directly from the choice. Therefore, the transitive closure of P, denoted by  P  
R  , must 
also be part of her revealed preference. One may wonder whether some revealed 
preference is overlooked by  P  
R   . The next theorem states that the answer is no:  P  R  is 
the revealed preference in our model.
THEOREM 1 (Revealed Preference): suppose c is a CLA. Then, x is revealed to be 
preferred to y if and only if x P  R  y.
Theorem 1 illustrates that welfare analysis is possible even with nonstandard 
choices. In addition, it provides a guideline for a policymaker.
The revealed preference characterized by Theorem 1 is independent of how her con-
sideration set is formed, as long as her consideration set mapping is an attention filter. 
Therefore, it is applicable to many situations. Depending on how her consideration 
set is formed, however, it may appear to be inappropriate to base the welfare analysis 
solely on our revealed preference. For instance, one can interpret her attention/inat-
tention as some reflection of her preference and argue that it should be incorporated to 
the welfare analysis. We do not disagree with such attempts, but to do so the policy-
maker must have more concrete views about the DM’s actual consideration set forma-
tion. In those cases, our revealed preference is what the policymaker can say without 
knowledge of the DM’s underlying consideration-set formation process.
Notice that our analysis is a model-based approach as the welfare criterion is 
obtained assuming a particular underlying choice procedure: a choice with limited 
attention. On the other hand, Bernheim and Rangel (2009) propose that one should 
make a welfare judgment only when the choices are unambiguous. Their intuition 
is that if x is never chosen while y is present and y is chosen at least once when x is 
available, then y should be strictly welfare-improving over x. Since this intuitive cri-
terion is independent of the underlying model, their approach is called model-free. 
Using Theorem 1, we are able to illustrate in a reasonable example that the above 
intuition might deceive us. In the next example, while x is never chosen when y is 
present, y is chosen at least once over x. Nevertheless, Theorem 1 dictates that x is 
revealed to be preferred to y.
ExAMPLE 1: There are four products x, y, z, and t. Each of them is packed in a box. 
Consider a supermarket that displays these products in its two aisles according to the 
following rules: (i) Each aisle can carry at most two products; (ii) x and y cannot be 
placed into the same aisle because they are packed in big boxes; (iii) The supermarket 
fills the first aisle first and uses the second aisle only if it is necessary; (iv) y and z are 

===PAGE BREAK===

2192 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW Augus T  2012
put into the first aisle whenever they are available; (v) t is placed in the first aisle only 
after all other available items are put in an aisle and the first aisle still has a space. 
Consider a costumer with preference t
 ≻
 x
 ≻
 z
 ≻
 y (not observable
) and she visits 
only the first aisle and picks her most preferred item displayed in that aisle.
It is easy to see that her consideration set mapping is an attention filter as the 
supermarket does not changes its lineups in its first aisle when something in the 
second aisle become unavailable. Hence, Theorem 1 is applicable.
Since x never appears in the first aisle when y is available, she never chooses x 
whenever y is feasible (and y is chosen when only x and y are available). Thus, the 
criterion by Bernheim and Rangel (2009), although it is very conservative to make 
a welfare statement, conclude that y is welfare-improving over x, which is opposite 
to her true preference.
In contrast to Bernheim and Rangel (2009), our model correctly identifies her 
true preference between y and x by Theorem 1. To see this, suppose all of four prod-
ucts are available. Then, y and z are placed in the first aisle, so z is chosen. When y 
becomes unavailable, then x is moved to the first aisle and is chosen. Furthermore, 
when z is also sold out, then x and t are placed in the first aisle, so she picks t. In 
sum, her choices will be c(x
 
yzT
 
)
 =
 z
, c(xzT
 
)
 =
 x
 and c(xT
 
)
 =
 t
. Then, when only 
choice is observable, our model concludes that the DM prefers z over y and x over z. 
Therefore, we can identify her preference between x and y correctly.
This example highlights the importance of knowledge about the underlying choice 
procedure when we conduct welfare analysis.
16 In other words, welfare analysis is 
more delicate a task than it looks.
Next, we investigate when we can unambiguously conclude that the DM pays (or 
does not pay) attention to an alternative. Consider the choice reversal above, from 
which we have concluded that she prefers x to y. Therefore, whenever y is chosen, 
she must not have paid attention to x (Revealed Inattention).
As we illustrate, we infer that x is revealed to attract attention at 
s whene
ver x is cho-
sen from 
s or remo
ving x from 
s causes a choice re
versal. Furthermore, it is possible 
to reach the same conclusion even when removing x from 
s does 
not cause a choice 
reversal. Imagine that the DM chooses the same item, say α
 
≠
 
x, from 
s and 
T and 
removing x from T causes a choice reversal, so we know x
 ∈ Γ(
T
 ) for sure. No
w col-
lect all items that belong to either 
s or 
T but not to both. Suppose all of those items are 
revealed to be preferred to α. Then, those items cannot be in Γ(
s 
) or Γ(T
 ). Therefore,
 
removing those items from 
s or 
T cannot change her consideration set. Hence, we have
 
Γ(
s )
 
=
 
Γ(
s 
∩
 
T
 )
 
=
 
Γ(T
 )
and can conclude that 
x is considered at 
s
.
The following theorem summarizes this observation and also provides the full 
characterization of revealed attention and inattention.
16 For a detailed discussion of this subject, see Manzini and Mariotti (2009b).

===PAGE BREAK===

2193M A s AT l IO glu ET  A l.: R EVEA l E d ATTENTIONV O l . 102 NO. 5
THeoReM 2 (Revealed (In)Attention): suppose c is a ClA. Then,
 (
i)
 
x is revealed not to attract attention at 
s
 if and only if x
 
P
  R  c ( s ),
 (
ii)
 
x is revealed to attract attention at 
s
 if and only if there exists T (possibly 
equal to 
s 
) such that:
  (
a)
 
c(T
 )
 
≠
 
c(T
 \
 x
),
  (
b)
 y
  
P
  R  c ( s ) for all y  ∈  s \  T , 
   z
  
P
  R  c (T  ) for all z  ∈  T  \  s .
Theorem 2 identifies both revealed attention and inattention. This information is 
as important as the revealed preference. For example, if a product is not popular in 
a market, it is very important for a firm to know the reason, which can be either that 
it is not liked by consumers or that it does not attract the attention of consumers.
III. Characterization
The two preceding theorems characterize revealed preference and revealed (in)
attention. They are not applicable, however, unless the observed choice behavior is 
a CLA. Therefore, a question to ponder is: how can we test whether a choice data 
is consistent with CLA? Surprisingly, it turns out that CLA can be characterized 
simply by only one behavioral postulate of choice.
Before we state the postulate, recall the sufficient and necessary condition for 
observed behavior to be consistent with the preference maximization under the full 
attention assumption: the Weak Axiom of Revealed Preference (W ARP). W ARP is 
equivalent to stating that every set 
s
 has the “best” alternative 
 x
 *  in the sense that it 
must be chosen from any set T whenever 
 x
 *  is available and the choice from T lies 
in 
s
. Formally,
W ARP: For any nonempty s, there exists  x  *  ∈ s such that for any T including  x  * ,
 
if c(T
 
) ∈ s
; then c(T
 )
 
=
  x
 * .
Because of the full attention assumption, being feasible is equal to attracting 
attention. This is no longer true when we allow for the possibility of limited atten-
tion, however. To conclude that 
 x *  is chosen from T , we not only need to make 
sure that the chosen element from T  is in 
s and 
 x *  is available but also that  x *  
attracts attention. As we have discussed, we can infer this when removing 
 x *  from 
T changes the DM’s choice, which is the additional requirement for 
 x *  to be cho-
sen from T . This discussion suggests the following postulate, which is a weaken-
ing of W ARP:
W ARP with Limited Attention (W ARP(LA)): For any nonempty s, there exists  
x
 *  ∈  s  such that, for any T including  x  * ,
 
if c(T
 )
 
∈
 s
 and c(T
 )
 
≠
 
c(T
 \
  x
 * ), then c(T )  =   x  * .

===PAGE BREAK===

2194 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW AugusT 2012
W ARP(LA) indeed guarantees that the binary relation P defined in equation (1) is 
acyclic and fully characterizes the class of choice functions generated by an atten-
tion filter. The next lemma makes it clear that W ARP(LA) is equivalent to the fact 
that P has no cycle.
LEMMA 1: P is acyclic if and only if c satisfies WARP with Limited Attention.
PROOF: 
(The if-part) Suppose P has a cycle:  x 
1  P x 2  P ⋯ P x k  P x 1  . Then for each 
i = 1, … , k − 1 there exists  T i  such that  x i  = c( T i ) ≠ c( T i  \  x i+1 ) and  x k  = c( T k ) 
≠ c( T k  \  x 1 ). Consider the set { x 1 , … ,  x k } ≡ s. Then, for every x ∈ s, there exists T 
such that c(T ) ∈ s and c(T \ x) ≠ c(T ) but x ≠ c(T ), so W ARP(LA) is violated.
(The only-if part) Suppose P is acyclic. Then every s has at least one element 
x such that there is no y ∈ s with yPx, which means that there is no y ∈ s with 
y = c(T ) ≠ c(T \ x). Equivalently, whenever c(T ) ∈ s and c(T ) ≠ c(T \ x), it must 
be x = c(T ), which is W ARP(LA).
THEOREM 3 (Characterization): c satisfies WARP(LA) if and only if c is a CLA.
Theorem 3 shows that a CLA is captured by a single behavioral postulate. 
This makes it possible to test our model nonparametrically by using the standard 
revealed-preference technique à la Samuelson and to derive the DM’s preferences 
and attention filter based on Theorem 1 and 2 from the observed choice data.
As we mentioned in the introduction, there are several related decision theoretic 
models where the final choice is made after eliminating several items, which are 
similar to a CLA such as Manzini and Mariotti (2007, forthcoming), Cherepanov, 
Feddersen, and Sandroni (2010), and Lleras et al. (2010). We shall illustrate that our 
model is different from these models both in a descriptive sense and in a behavior 
sense.
To show the difference more starkly, we compare our model with the 
“Rationalization” concept in Cherepanov, Feddersen, and Sandroni ( 2010). At 
first glance, Rationalization would appear to be a special case of our model. In 
fact,this is not the case. In the Rationalization model, the DM chooses the best 
alternative among those she can rationalize. The set of rationalizable alternatives 
is defined by her set of rationales. Each rationale is a transitive binary relation that 
may or may not be complete. The set of rationalizable alternatives in s  consists of 
all the alternatives that dominate all other alternatives according to at least one of 
her rationales. Formally,
  Γ 
CFs  (s ) = { y ∈ s | ∃ Ri such that y Ri x for all x ∈ s },
where each  R i  is a rationale (a transitive binary relation).
In general,  Γ CFs  is not an attention filter. To see this, consider three alternatives 
x, y, z and two rationales: x  R 1  y  R 1  z and y  R 2  x. First, observe that when all options are 
present, then x is rationalizable but z is not. On the other hand, y is rationalizable only 
when z is removed because  R 2  does not compare y and z. That is, z ∉  Γ CFs  (x yz) but  

===PAGE BREAK===

2195MAsATLIOgLu ET AL.: REVEALEd ATTENTIONVOL. 102 NO. 5
Γ CFs  (x yz) ≠  Γ CFs  (x y)—whereas our framework requires  Γ CFs  (x yz) =  Γ CFs  (x y). 
This example shows that there are rationales that do not satisfy the conditions of our 
model. At the same time, it is easy to show that for any rationalization,
 x ∈  Γ CFs  (s ) ⇒ x ∈  Γ CFs  (T ) for all x ∈ T ⊂ s.
This property does not necessarily hold in our framework (e.g., Most Popular 
Category). Hence, there are attention filters that do not satisfy the conditions of 
their model. In short, neither model is a special case of the other.
One can modify Rationalization to make it a proper special case of our model. The 
necessary modification requires that the admissible rationales are not only transitive 
but are also complete.
17 If Rationalization were restricted in this way, each rational-
izable alternative is an attention filter (though the converse is still not true).
We now demonstrate how these models differ from the CLA model behaviorally 
by means of examples. First, we shall present an example of a CLA that cannot be 
explained by any of these models. Although these models have different character-
izations, all of them satisfy the axiom called Weak W ARP (Manzini and Mariotti 
2007) so we only need to show that it violates that axiom. The Weak W ARP states 
that if x is chosen over y both from the pair and from a larger set, y cannot be chosen 
from anywhere between. Formally,
Weak W ARP: Suppose {x, y} ⊂ T ⊂ s. If x = c(x y) = c(s ), then y ≠ c(T ).
Consider the following example of a CLA:
ExAMPLE 2: There are four alternatives x, y, a, b. The alternatives a and b are 
never chosen (unless there is no other alternative) but they alter the attention of the 
dM. Her preference is y ≻ x ≻ a ≻ b and she picks the best alternative from those 
she considers. she considers y only when either a or b is feasible, but not both, and 
always considers all other alternatives. It is easy to see that her consideration set 
mapping is an attention filter so her choice function satisfies WARP(LA). It does not 
satisfy Weak-WARP , however, because c(x y) = c(x yab) = x (y is not considered) 
but c(x ya) = y.
Conversely, none of the above alternative models is a special case of the CLA 
model. In Example 3, we present a model of the Rational Shortlist Method of 
Manzini and Mariotti (2007) that cannot be a CLA. One can easily verify that exactly 
the same choice function can be generated by other models mentioned above. The 
rational shortlist model consists of two rationales,  P 
1  and  P 2 , where  P 1  has no cycle 
(not necessarily transitive) and  P 2  is a complete and transitive order.18 The decision 
17 “The top on each criterion” introduced in Section IA coincides with the rationalization model when all ratio-
nales are complete.
18 Actually, Manzini and Mariotti (2007) do not require the second rationale ( P 2 ) to be complete and transitive 
(it only requires  P 2  to be asymmetric). We put the stronger requirement on  P 2  in order to highlight that the differ -
ence between these models is generated by the first stage, not by the incompleteness or intransitivity of the second 
rationale, which corresponds to the DM’s preference in our model.

===PAGE BREAK===

2196 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW AugusT 2012
is made applying these rationales sequentially to eliminate alternatives. Consider the 
following example of the rational shortlist model:
ExAMPLE 3: The first rationale (not transitive19) and the second rationale (transi-
tive) are:
 t  P 
1  y, y  P 1  x, z  P 1  x, z  P 1  s, 
 s  P 2  x P 2  y  P 2  z  P 2  t .
For instance, if the feasible set is {s, y, z}, s is eliminated in the first stage by z and 
she picks y in the second stage by comparing y and z according to  P 2  . This choice 
function, however, would generate contradictory revealed preferences if it were a 
CLA:
	 •	 z	 Pt since z = c(yzt) and y = c(yz),
	 •	 t	 Py since t = c(x yt) and x = c(x t),
	 •	 y	 Pz since y = c(syz) and s = c(s y).
Thus, it cannot be explained by a CLA by Lemma 1. Hence, this choice cannot be 
a part of our model.
IV . Anomalies
Our limited attention model is capable of accommodating several frequently 
observed behaviors: Attraction Effect, Cyclical Choice, and Choosing Pairwisely 
Unchosen. Our explanations for these choice patterns depend solely on limited 
attention; hence, seemingly irrational behaviors can be explained without intro-
ducing changing preference. We will overview them and illustrate how our model 
accommodates them. In addition, we elicit the DM’s preference, attention, and inat-
tention from such choice data.
Attraction Effect.—The attraction effect refers to a phenomenon where adding an 
irrelevant alternative to a choice set affects the choice.
20 A typical attraction effect 
choice patterns is
 c(x yd ) = y, c(x y) = x, c( yd ) = y, c(x d ) = x.
Here d is the irrelevant alternative that shifts the choice from x to y.21 Thus, d is the 
decoy of y. Lehmann and Pan (1994) show experimentally that introducing new 
19 One can show that if  P 1  is transitive, the first-stage elimination generates an attention filter so the resulting 
choice will be a CLA as long as  P 2  is complete and transitive.
20 This phenomenon is well-documented and robust in behavioral research on marketing (Huber, Payne, and 
Puto 1982; Tversky and Simonson 1993), including choices among monetary gambles, political candidates, job 
candidates, environmental issues, and medical decision making. Advertising irrelevant alternatives is commonly 
used as a marketing strategy to invoke the attraction effect on the customers.
21 The standard continuity is inconsistent with the attraction effect: x = c(x,  d n , y) for all n but y is chosen at the 
limit (y = c(x, y)) where { d n } is a sequence of x ’s decoys converging to x. Nevertheless, the model can still enjoy a 

===PAGE BREAK===

2197MAsATLIOgLu ET AL.: REVEALEd ATTENTIONVOL. 102 NO. 5
products causes an attraction effect particularly by affecting the composition of 
consideration sets. How the CLA model accommodates the attraction effect is in 
line with their findings. One possible representation is that the DM’s preference 
is y ≻ x ≻ d and she considers y only when d is present (otherwise, she considers 
everything). It is clear that her consideration set mapping is an attention filter.
Now we elicit the preference of a DM whose choice behavior follows the same 
pattern above without knowing her preference and consideration sets. By Theorem 
1, y = c(x y d) ≠ c(x y) implies that y is revealed to be preferred to d. That is, our 
model judges that she prefers y over its own decoy.
Although most of the research on attraction effect is centered around one decoy 
option, a natural extension of the attraction effect is to include additional decoys. In 
particular, what happens if a decoy of x is introduced in addition to the aforemen-
tioned example? Teppan and Felfernig (2009) demonstrated that displaying both a 
decoy of x and a decoy of y along with x and y will lead the DM to choose as if there 
were no decoys.
22
Formally, suppose that there are two decoys,  d x  and  d y  of x and y, respectively. 
That is,
 c(x y  d x   d y ) = x, c(x y  d y ) = y, c(x y) = x.
Most of the theoretical literature, including that which can accomodate the 
attraction effect with one decoy option, cannot accomodate this choice behavior. 23 
Nevertheless, the CLA model can accommodate this behavior: she considers y only 
when  d y  is present but  d x  is not. She ignores x when  d y  is available but not  d x  . Then 
she will exhibit the above choice as long as she prefers x over  d x  and y over  d y  .
Again, assume we have no prior information about the DM’s preference and consid-
eration sets. The first two choices reveal that she pays attention to  d x  at {x, y,  d x ,  d y } so 
prefers x over  d x . Similarly, the second and third tell us she prefers y over  d y  . Therefore, 
our approach again elicits her preference between an alternative and its decoy.
Here we rely on the paper by Lehmann and Pan (1994), which suggests experi-
mentally that attraction effect is due to the composition of consideration sets. There 
are other explanations, however, for attraction effect (Huber, Payne, and Puto 1982). 
For example, one explanation concerns the DM being able to “give a reason” for the 
choice of x over y or vice versa. An asymmetrically dominated alternative gives such 
a reason. It seems that each explanation could be more appropriate than the others 
depending on the environment.
weaker continuity along with the attraction effect. For example, assume  y n  → y and y,  y n  ∉ s, then
 If  y n  ∉ c(s ∪  y n ) then { y} ≠ c(s ∪  y n ).
Indeed, one can show that the CLA is continuous in this sense if ≻ is continuous and the attention filter satisfies: (a)  
y n  ∉ Γ(s ∪  y n ) implies y ∉ Γ(s ∪ y); and (b) z ∈ Γ(s ∪  y n ) implies z ∈ Γ(s ∪ y) when  y n  → y.
22 Eliaz and Spiegler (2011) studied a game theoretical model where firms would like to influence consumers’ 
consideration sets by introducing costly decoys.
23 This generalized attraction effect is another example that lies outside of recent models provided in Cherepanov, 
Feddersen, and Sandroni (2010), Manzini and Mariotti (forthcoming), and Lleras et al. (2010) since it does not 
satisfy Weak W ARP. There are two exceptions: Ok, Ortoleva, and Riella (2010), and de Clippel and Eliaz (2012). 
These two models, however, can accommodate neither Cyclical nor Choosing Pairwisely choice patterns.

===PAGE BREAK===

2198 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW AugusT 2012
Cyclical Choice.—May (1954) provides the first experiment where cyclical choice 
patterns are observed and these results have been replicated in many different choice 
environments (e.g., Tversky 1969; Loomes, Starmer, and Sugden 1991; Manzini 
and Mariotti 2009a; Mandler, Manzini, and Mariotti 2010). Consider a cyclical 
choice pattern:
 c(x yz) = x, c(x y) = x, c( yz) = y, c(x z) = z.
We have already illustrated that this choice pattern can be captured by our model 
at the beginning of Section II. Now let us elicit the preference. Since the DM exhibits 
a choice reversal when y is removed from {x, y, z}, we can identify that y attracts her 
attention when these three elements are present. So, we can conclude that she prefers 
x over y. As illustrated before, however, we cannot determine the ranking of z.
Choosing Pairwisely unchosen.—In this choice pattern, the DM chooses an alter-
native that is never chosen from pairwise comparisons:
 c(x yz) = z, c(x y) = x, c(yz) = y, c(x z) = x.
Since removing x or y from {x, y, z} changes her choice, it is revealed that z is bet-
ter than x and y but we cannot determine her preference between x and y. Since her 
revealed preference has no cycle, her behavior is captured by our model through 
Lemma 1 and Theorem 3.
Note that the best element, z, is not chosen in any binary choice, so we can conclude 
that she pays attention to z only when x and y are present. Applying Theorem 2, we 
can pin down her consideration set uniquely except when her feasible set is {x, y}. (See 
Table 2.)
One possible story that generates such an attention pattern is “searching more 
when the decision is tough.” Several items are hard to find even if they are feasible. 
The DM first considers alternatives that are feasible and easy to find and if there is 
an item that dominates all others, she chooses it immediately. Otherwise, she makes 
an extensive search to find all feasible items. In the former case, the consideration 
set consists only of easily found (and feasible) alternatives and in the latter case 
it coincides with the feasible set. Given this story, suppose her true preference is 
z ≻ x ≻ y where the decision between x and y is very tough and z is hard to find. 
She makes an extensive search to find z only if she sees both x and y. If either x or y 
is missing, she does not bother to search, and therefore overlooks z.
Table 2—Choosing Pairwisely Unchosen
Revealed preference  z  P  R  x and z  P  R  y 
{x, y, z}  {x, y}  { y, z}  {x, z}
Revealed attention x yz x y x
Revealed inattention — — z z

===PAGE BREAK===

2199MAsATLIOgLu ET AL.: REVEALEd ATTENTIONVOL. 102 NO. 5
V . Further Comments on Revealed Preference
In this section, we discuss the boundaries of our revealed preference approach. 
First of all, our revealed preference could be very incomplete; in other words, it 
only provides coarse welfare judgments. In the extreme case where the choice data 
satisfies W ARP, Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 do not provide any identification of the 
preference and attention/ inattention. This is because the DM’s behavior can be 
attributed fully to her preference or to her inattention ( never considering anything 
other than her actual choice). Thus, we cannot make any statement without impos-
ing any additional assumption. This extreme example illustrates the limitation of 
choice data, which alone is not enough to identify her preferences. Notice that the 
classical revealed preference is not an exception since it assumes implicitly full 
attention.
Nevertheless, a policymaker may be forced to make a welfare judgment even 
when our revealed preference is silent. There are three directions to deal with 
incompleteness of our revealed preference: (i) looking for additional data other than 
choice data; (ii) imposing additional structures on attention filter; and/or (iii) utiliz-
ing other methods as long as the resulting revealed preference includes ours. We will 
discuss each of them in detail.
Additional data.—The idea of our (direct) revealed preference is that we can con-
clude that x is preferred to y if x is chosen while y receives attention, which is inferred 
because removing y changes her choice. If we know y is considered for some other 
reason, however, we will naturally make the same conclusion even without observ-
ing such a choice change. One can obtain such information from many sources, such 
as eye-tracking, functional magnetic resonance imaging, and the tracking system in 
internet commerce.
24 If the policymaker believes that these sources are trustworthy, 
he can utilize them to obtain additional information about preferences.
Furthermore, additional information about preferences can also have a cascading 
effect. For instance, the choice data may not reveal the ranking between x and y but 
some laboratory experiment or survey study may have already found that x is better 
than y. In such a case, the policymaker can add x ≻ y to the revealed preference gen-
erated by our method (Theorem 1), say P′ =  P  
R  ∪ {(x, y)}. By using the transitive 
closure of P′, denoted by  P  R  ′   , the policymaker can obtain more attention/inattention 
information as in Theorem 2. Indeed, Theorem 1 and 2 are exactly applicable by 
replacing  P  R  with the transitive closure of  P  R  ′  .
Similarly, a policymaker may know that the consumer pays attention to x under 
certain decision problems. This information immediately generates more informa-
tion about her preference (the chosen element here is better than x ), which tells 
more about her attention/inattention, as in the previous case.
Further Restrictions on Consideration sets.—The other direction is to impose 
additional restrictions on Γ. For example, if the source of limited attention is simply 
the abundance of alternatives, one reasonable restriction is that the DM considers 
24 In this regard, our theory highlights the importance of other tools (besides observed choice) that can shed light 
on the choice process rather than outcome.

===PAGE BREAK===

2200 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW AugusT 2012
at least two alternatives for each decision problem. That is, | Γ(s ) | ⩾ 2. Under this 
restriction, the choice data reveals the consumer’s preference completely. This result 
is trivial but still it is important in order to identify whether an unchosen alternative 
attracts attention. Our approach will provide an answer for the revealed attention. 
The revealed attention and inattention will be characterized by Theorem 2 by replac-
ing  P  
R  with the completely identified preference.
Notice that the classical revealed preference can be seen as one of such an attempt 
with the strongest assumption on the consideration set Γ(s ) = s. Our model high-
lights that we need to assume how choices are made in order to make a meaningful 
revealed preference exercise. The assumption about what is chosen (like W ARP) is 
not enough.
Other Methods.—One can combine our methodology with others which try to 
make the welfare analysis without relying on a particular choice procedure, such as 
Apesteguia and Ballester (2010), and Bernheim and Rangel (2009). What is com-
mon between our model and theirs is that all try to respect the consumer’s choice for 
the welfare judgment as much as possible. The difference is that our model does so 
only when the consumer actually considers other unchosen alternatives.
Now imagine that a policymaker knows/ believes a consumer behaves accord-
ing to our model. Then, he should first elicit her preference based on our method. 
Admittedly, it only provides an incomplete ranking ( and empty if the choice data 
satisfies W ARP). If the policymaker is forced to make a complete welfare judg-
ment with a risk of making mistakes, he can apply the other methods with the 
constraint of respecting the revealed preference generated by our model. In other 
words, these methods should be used to break the incompleteness of our revealed 
preference.
For instance, consider Apesteguia and Ballester’s approach. They first axiomati-
cally construct an index to measure the consistency between choice data and a certain 
preference, and of all complete and transitive preferences pick the one that mini-
mizes the inconsistency for the welfare analysis. If the policymaker knows the DM 
follows a choice with limited attention, however, he should first elicit her preference 
based on our method and then pick the inconsistency-minimizing preference only 
from those that are consistent with our revealed preference. The resulting welfare 
judgment can be wrong (can be different from her actual preference). Nevertheless, 
this sequential process eliminates certain mistakes the policymaker would make if 
he simply applied the other model-free methods. For instance, applying Apesteguia 
and Ballester’s approach directly to Example 1 will lead to the wrong conclusion: 
y is welfare-improving over x but this sequential advocacy certainly kills such a 
mistake.
VI. Conclusion
Limited attention has been widely studied in economics: neglecting the nontrans-
parent taxes (Chetty, Looney, and Kroft 2009); inattention to released information 
(DellaVigna and Pollet 2007); costly information acquisition (Gabaix et al. 2006); 
and rational inattention in macroeconomics (Sims 2003). For example, Goeree 
(2008) shows that relaxing the full attention assumption by allowing customers to 

===PAGE BREAK===

2201MAsATLIOgLu ET AL.: REVEALEd ATTENTIONVOL. 102 NO. 5
be unaware of some computers in the market is enough to explain the high markups 
in the PC industry.
In this paper, we study the implications of limited attention on revealed prefer -
ence. We illustrate when and how one can deduce both the preference and consider-
ation sets of a DM who follows a CLA. The distinction between a preference and an 
(in)attention is crucial. For instance, if a product is not popular in a market, it is very 
important for a firm to know the reason, which can either be that it is not liked by 
consumers or that it does not attract the attention of consumers. Our model provides 
a theoretical framework to distinguish these two possibilities. Similarly, a social 
planner can find a proper strategy to make sure that people choose the right option 
in 401(K) plans and health insurance. Hence, in a welfare analysis it is important to 
understand the underlying model of the DM.
Since revealed preference and ( in)attention are the main focus of the paper, 
we impose a rather weak restriction on consideration sets. Such a weak condi-
tion allows us to apply our revealed preference and ( in)attention theorems to 
seemingly irrational choice patterns ( i.e., Attraction Effect, Cyclical Choice, and 
Choosing Pairwisely Unchosen) . Nevertheless, depending on the intended appli-
cation, our framework can be used to analyze choices under different restrictions 
on consideration sets.
In many real-world markets, products compete with each other for the space in 
the consideration set of the DM, who has cognitive limitations. In these situations, 
if an alternative attracts attention when there exist many others, then it is easier to 
be considered when some of other alternatives become unavailable. If a product is 
able to attract attention on a crowded supermarket shelf, the same product will be 
noticed when there are fewer alternatives; i.e., x ∈ Γ(T ) implies x ∈ Γ(s ) whenever 
x ∈ s ⊂ T. Lleras et al. (2010) extensively study consideration sets that satisfy this 
property. They also consider the cases where both conditions are satisfied.
Lleras et al. (2010) also consider another special case whereby the DM over -
looks or disregards an alternative because it is dominated by another item in some 
aspect. Imagine that Maryland’s economics department is hiring one tenure-track 
theorist. Since there are too many candidates in the job market to consider all of 
them, the department asks other departments to recommend their best theory stu-
dents. Therefore, a candidate from Michigan is ignored if and only if there is another 
Michigan candidate who is rated better by Michigan. In this case, Maryland’s filter is 
represented by an irreflexive and transitive order as long as each department’s rank-
ing over its students is rational. Formally, given an irreflexive and transitive order 
⊳
25, the attention filter consists of alternatives that are undominated with respect to 
this order,  Γ ⊳ (s ) = {x ∈ s | ∄ y ∈ s such that y ⊳ x}.
Appendix: Proofs
Notice that the if parts of Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 have already been shown in 
the main text. The following proofs use these results.
25 This order is not necessarily complete, as in this example; Michigan does not compare its students with can-
didates from other schools.

===PAGE BREAK===

2202 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW AugusT 2012
PROOF OF THEOREM 3:
Suppose c is a CLA represented by (≻, Γ). Then Theorem 1(if part) implies that 
≻ must include P so P must be acyclic. Therefore, by Lemma 1, c must satisfy 
W ARP(LA).
Now suppose that c satisfies W ARP(LA). By Lemma 1, P is acyclic so there is a 
preference ≻ that includes P. Pick any such preference arbitrarily and define
(2) Γ(s ) = {x ∈ s : c(s ) ≻ x } ⋃ {c(s )}.
Then, it is clear that c(s ) is the unique ≻-best element in Γ(s ), so all we need to 
show is that Γ is an attention filter. Suppose x ∈ s but x ∉ Γ(s ) (so x ≠ c(s )). By 
construction, x ≻ c(s ) so it cannot be c(s )Px. Hence, it must be c(s ) = c(s \ x) so 
we have Γ(s ) = Γ(s \ x).
PROOF OF THEOREM 1 (The Only-If Part):
Suppose x P  R  y does not hold. Then there exists a preference that includes  P  R  and 
ranks y better than x. The proof of Theorem 3 shows that c can be represented by 
such a preference so x is not revealed to be preferred to y.
PROOF OF THEOREM 2 (The Only-If Parts):
(Revealed Inattention) Suppose x is not revealed to be preferred to c(s ). Then 
pick a preference that includes  P  R  and puts c(s ) above x. The proof of Theorem 3 
shows that c can be represented by such a preference and an attention filter Γ with 
x ∈ Γ(s ).
(Revealed Attention) Suppose there exists no T that satisfies the condition. We 
shall prove that if c is a CLA then it can be represented by some attention filter Γ 
with x ∉ Γ(s ). If c(s )  P  R  x does not hold, we have already shown that c can be rep-
resented with x ≻ c(s ) and x ∉ Γ(s ), so x is not revealed to attract attention at s, so 
we focus on the case when c(s )  P  R  x.
Now construct a binary relation,   ˜ P , where a   ˜ P b if and only if “a  P  R  b” or “a = c(s ) 
and not b  P  R  c(s ).” That is,   ˜ P  puts c(s ) as high as possible as long as it does not con-
tradict  P  R  . Since  P  R  is acyclic and c is represented by an attention filter, one can show 
that   ˜ P  is also acyclic. Given this, take any preference relation ≻ that includes   ˜ P , which 
includes  P  R  as well. We have already shown that   ˜ Γ (s ) ≡ {z ∈ s : c(s ) ≻ z} ⋃ {c(s )} 
is an attention filter and (  ˜ Γ , ≻) represents c. Now define Γ as follows:
    ˜ Γ (s′ ) for s′ ∉ 
 Γ(s′ ) = {  ,
    ˜ Γ (s′ ) \ x for s′ ∈ 
where  is a collections of sets such that
 c(s′ ) = c(s ) and
   = {s′ ⊂ X :    } .
 z  P  R  c(s ) for all z ∈ (s \ s′ ) ⋃ (s′ \ s )

===PAGE BREAK===

2203MAsATLIOgLu ET AL.: REVEALEd ATTENTIONVOL. 102 NO. 5
That is, Γ is obtained from   ˜ Γ  by removing from x any budget set s′ where 
c(s ) = c(s′ ) and any item that belongs to s or s′ but not to both is revealed to be 
better than c(s ). Notice that x cannot be c(s ) because if this true, the condition of 
the statement is satisfied for T = s. Hence, Γ(s′ ) ⊂   ˜ Γ (s′ ) always includes c(s′ ). 
Furthermore, the proof of Theorem 3 shows that (  ˜ Γ ,≻) represents c. Therefore, 
(Γ,≻) also represents c, so we only need to show that Γ is an attention filter.
To do that, it is useful to notice that   ˜ Γ  is an attention filter and c(T ′ ) = c(T ″ ) 
whenever   ˜ Γ (T ′ ) =   ˜ Γ (T ″ ) because (  ˜ Γ ,≻) represents c.
Suppose y ∉ Γ(T ). We shall prove Γ(T ) = Γ(T \ y).
Case I: y = x
If T ∉ , then we have Γ(T ) =   ˜ Γ (T ) =   ˜ Γ (T \ x) = Γ(T \ x). If T ∈ , then it 
must be c(T ) = c(T \ x) (otherwise, the condition of the statement is satisfied) so by 
construction of   ˜ Γ  and Γ, we have Γ(T ) =   ˜ Γ (T ) \ x =   ˜ Γ (T \ x) = Γ(T \ x).
Case II: T ∈  and y ≠ x
Since y ∉ Γ(T ) is equivalent to y ∉   ˜ Γ (T ), we have   ˜ Γ (T ) =   ˜ Γ (T \ y). Therefore, 
c(T \ y) = c(T ) = c(s ). By construction of Γ and   ˜ Γ , it must be y ≻ c(s ), which 
implies y  P  R  c(s ) by construction of ≻. Therefore, T \ y ∈ . Therefore, Γ(T ) 
=   ˜ Γ (T ) \ x =   ˜ Γ (T \ y) \ x = Γ(T \ y).
Case III: T ∉  and y ≠ x
If T \ y ∈ , analogous to the previous case, we have c(T ) = c(T \ y) = c(s ) and 
y  P  R  c(s ), so it must be T ∈ , which is a contradiction. Hence, T \ y ∉ , so we have 
Γ(T ) =   ˜ Γ (T ) =   ˜ Γ (T \ y) = Γ(T \ y).
REFERENCES
Ambrus, Attila, and Kareen Rozen. 2010. “Rationalizing Choice with Multi-Self Models.”  Unpublished.
Apesteguia, Jose, and Miguel A. Ballester. 2009. “Choice by Sequential Procedures.” Unpublished.
Apesteguia, Jose, and Miguel A. Ballester. 2010. “A Measure of Rationality and Welfare.” Unpublished.
Aumann, Robert J. 2005. “Musings on Information and Knowledge.” Economics Journal Watch 2 (1): 
88–96.
Basar, Gozen, and Chandra Bhat. 2004. “A Parameterized Consideration Set Model for Airport 
Choice: An Application to the San Francisco Bay Area.” Transportation Research: Part B: Method-
ological 38 (10): 889–904.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. 2007. “Toward Choice-Theoretic Foundations for Behav-
ioral Welfare Economics.” American Economic Review 97 (2): 464–70.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. 2009. “Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice-Theoretic 
Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (1): 51–104.
Broadbent, Donald E. 1958. Perception and Communication. New York: Pergamon Press.
Caplin, Andrew, and Mark Dean. 2011. “Search, Choice, and Revealed Preference.” Theoretical Eco-
nomics 6 (1): 19–48.
Caplin, Andrew, Mark Dean, and Daniel Martin. 2011. “Search and Satisficing.” American Economic 
Review 101 (7): 2899–2922.
Chambers, Christopher P., and Takashi Hayashi. 2008. “Choice and Individual Welfare.” California 
Institute of Technology Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences Working Paper 1286.
Cherepanov, Vadim, Timothy Feddersen, and Alvaro Sandroni. 2010. “Rationalization.” Unpublished.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.” 
American Economic Review 99 (4): 1145–77.

===PAGE BREAK===

2204 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW AugusT 2012
Chiang, Jeongwen, Siddhartha Chib, and Chakravarthi Narasimhan. 1999. “Markov Chain Monte 
Carlo and Models of Consideration Set and Parameter Heterogeneity.” Journal of Econometrics 89 
(1–2): 223–48.
Dawes, Philip L., and Jennifer Brown. 2005. “The Composition of Consideration and Choice Sets in 
Undergraduate University Choice: An Exploratory Study.” Journal of Marketing for Higher Educa-
tion 14 (2): 37–59.
De Clippel, Geoffroy, and Kfir Eliaz. 2012. “Reason-Based Choice: A Bargaining Rationale for the 
Attraction and Compromise Effects.” Theoretical Economics 7 (1): 125–62.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Joshua M. Pollet. 2007. “Demographics and Industry Returns.” American 
Economic Review 97 (5): 1667–1702.
Dulleck, Uwe, Franz Hackl, Bernhard Weiss, and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer. 2008. “Buying Online: 
Sequential Decision Making by Shopbot Visitors.” Institut für Höhere Studien Wien Economics 
Series 225.
Eliaz, Kfir, Michael Richter, and Ariel Rubinstein. 2011. “Choosing the Two Finalists.” Economic The-
ory 46 (2): 211–19.
Eliaz, Kfir, and Ran Spiegler. 2011. “Consideration Sets and Competitive Marketing.” Review of Eco-
nomic studies 78 (1): 235–62.
Filiz-Ozbay, Emel. 2010. “Incorporating Awareness into Contract Theory.” Unpublished.
Gabaix, Xavier, David Laibson, Guillermo Moloche, and Stephen Weinberg. 2006. “Costly Informa-
tion Acquisition: Experimental Analysis of a Boundedly Rational Model.” American Economic 
Review 96 (4): 1043–68.
Goeree, Michelle Sovinsky. 2008. “Limited Information and Advertising in the U.S. Personal Com-
puter Industry.” Econometrica 76 (5): 1017–74.
Green, Jerry, and Daniel Hojman. 2007. “Choice, Rationality and Welfare Measurement.” Harvard 
University John F. Kennedy School of Government Working Paper 2144.
Hauser, John R., and Birger Wernerfelt. 1990. “An Evaluation Cost Model of Evoked Sets.” Journal 
of Consumer Research 16: 383–408.
Hausman, Daniel. 2008. “Mindless or Mindful Economics: A Methodological Evaluation.” In The 
Foundations of Positive and Normative Economics: A Handbook, edited by Andrew Caplin and 
Andrew Schotter, 125–55. New York: Oxford University Press.
Heifetz, Aviad, Martin Meier, and Burkhard C. Schipper. 2010. “Dynamic Unawareness and Rational-
izable Behavior.” Unpublished.
Hotchkiss, Gord, Steve Jensen, Manoj Jasra, and Doug Wilson. 2004. “The Role of Search in Business 
to Business Buying Decisions A Summary of Research Conducted.” Unpublished.
Houy, Nicolas. 2007. “Rationality and Order-Dependent Sequential Rationality.” Theory and decision 
62 (2): 119–34.
Houy, Nicolas, and Koichi Tadenuma. 2009. “Lexicographic Compositions of Multiple Criteria for 
Decision Making.” Journal of Economic Theory 144 (4): 1770–82.
Huber, Joel, John W. Payne, and Christopher Puto. 1982. “Adding Asymmetrically Dominated Alter-
natives: Violations of Regularity and the Similarity Hypothesis.” Journal of Consumer Research 9 
(1): 90–98.
Huberman, Gur, and Tomer Regev. 2001. “Contagious Speculation and a Cure for Cancer: A Nonevent 
that Made Stock Prices Soar.” Journal of Finance 56 (1): 387–96.
Lavidge, R. J., and G. A. Steiner. 1961. “A Model for Predictive Measurements of Advertising Effec-
tiveness.” Journal of Marketing 25 (6): 59–62.
Lehmann, Donald R., and Yigang Pan. 1994. “Context Effects, New Brand Entry, and Consideration 
Sets.” Journal of Marketing Research 31 (3): 364–74.
Lleras, Juan S., Yusufcan Masatlioglu, Daisuke Nakajima, and Erkut Y. Ozbay. 2010. “When More is 
Less: Choice by Limited Consideration.” Unpublished.
Loomes, Graham, Chris Starmer, and Robert Sugden. 1991. “Observing Violations of Transitivity by 
Experimental Methods.” Econometrica 59 (2): 425–39.
Mandler, Michael, Paola Manzini, and Marco Mariotti. 2010. “A Million Answers to Twenty Ques-
tions: Choosing by Checklist.” Unpublished.
Manzini, Paola, and Marco Mariotti. 2007. “Sequentially Rationalizable Choice.” American Economic 
Review 97 (5): 1824–39.
Manzini, Paola, and Marco Mariotti. 2009a. “Choice over Time.” In The Handbook of Rational and 
social Choice, edited by Paul Anand, Prastanta Pattanaik, and Clemens Puppe, 239–71. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Manzini, Paola, and Marco Mariotti. 2009b. “Choice Based Welfare Economics for Boundedly Ratio-
nal Agents.” Unpublished.

===PAGE BREAK===

2205MAsATLIOgLu ET AL.: REVEALEd ATTENTIONVOL. 102 NO. 5
Manzini, Paola, and Marco Mariotti. Forthcoming. “Categorize Then Choose: Boundedly Rational 
Choice and Welfare.” Journal of the European Economic Association.
Masatlioglu, Yusufcan, and Daisuke Nakajima. 2009. “Choice by Iterative Search.” Unpublished.
May, K. O. 1954. “Intransitivity, Utility, and the Aggregation of Preference Patterns.” Econometrica 
22 (1): 1–13.
Noor, Jawwad. 2011. “Temptation and Revealed Preference.” Econometrica 79 (2): 601–44.
Ok, Efe A., Pietro Ortoleva, and Gil Riella, 2010. “Revealed (P)Reference Theory.” Unpublished.
Ozbay, Erkut Y. 2008. “Unawareness and Strategic Announcements in Games with Uncertainty.” 
Unpublished.
Pessemier, Edgar A. 1978. “Stochastic Properties of Changing Preferences.” American Economic 
Review 68 (2): 380–85.
Richards, Max D., John E. Sheridan, and John W. Slocum. 1975. “Comparative Analysis of Expec-
tancy and Heuristic Models of Decision Behavior.” Journal of Applied Psychology 60 (3): 361–68.
Roberts, John H., and James M. Lattin. 1991. “Development and Testing of a Model of Consideration 
Set Composition.” Journal of Marketing Research 28 (4): 429–40.
Rubinstein, Ariel, and Yuval Salant. 2012. “Eliciting Welfare Preferences from Behavioral Datasets.” 
Review of Economic studies 79 (1): 375–87.
Salant, Yuval, and Ariel Rubinstein. 2008. “(A, f): Choice with Frames.” Review of Economic studies 
75 (4): 1287–96.
Samuelson, P. A. 1938. “A Note on the Pure Theory of Consumer’s Behaviour.” Economica 5 (17): 
61–71.
Simon, Herbert A. 1957. Models of Man: social and Rational: Mathematical Essays on Rational 
Human Behavior in a social setting. New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Sims, Christopher A. 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary Economics 
50 (3): 665–90.
Stigler, G. J. 1961. “The Economics of Information.” Journal of Political Economy 69: 213–25.
Teppan, Erich Christian, and Alexander Felfernig. 2009. “Minimization of Product Utility Estimation 
Errors in Recommender Result Set Evaluations.” In WI-IAT 2009 Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE/
WIC/ACM International Joint Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology, 
V ol. 1, 20–27. Milan, Italy: University of Milano-Bicocca. 
Tversky, Amos. 1969. “Intransitivity of Preferences.” Psychological Review 76: 31–48.
Tversky, Amos, and Itamar Simonson. 1993. “Context-Dependent Preferences.” Management science 
39 (10): 1179–89.
Varian, Hal R. 2006.” Revealed Preference.” In samuelsonian Economics and the Twenty-First Cen-
tury, edited by M. Szenberg, L. Ramrattan, and A. A. Gottesman, 99–115. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Wright, Peter, and Fredrick Barbour. 1977. “Phased Decision Strategies: Sequels to an Initial Screen-
ing.” In Multiple Criteria decision Making, edited by Martin K. Starr and Milan Zeleny, 91–109. 
Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co.
Zyman, Sergio. 1999. The End of Marketing as We Know It. New York: Harper Collins.