Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267
ONLINE DEMAND UNDER LIMITED CONSUMER SEARCH вҲ—
Jun B. Kim вҖ  Paulo Albuquerque вҖЎ Bart J. Bronnenberg В§
October 19, 2009
Abstract
Using aggregate product search data from Amazon.com, we jointly estimate consumer information
search and online demand for consumer durable goods. To estimate the demand and search primitives,
we introduce an optimal sequential search process into a model of choice and treat the observed market-
level product search data as aggregations of individual-level optimal search sequences. The model builds
on the dynamic programming framework by Weitzman (1979) and combines it with a choice model. It
can accommodate highly complex demand patterns at the market level. At the individual level, the
model has a number of attractive properties in estimation, including closed-form expressions for the
probability distribution of alternative sets of searched goods and breaking the curse of dimensionality.
Using numerical experiments, we verify the model's ability to identify the heterogeneous consumer tastes
and search costs from product search data. Empirically, the model is applied to the online market for
camcorders and is used to answer manufacturer questions about market structure and competition,
and to address policy maker issues about the eect of selectively lowered search costs on consumer
surplus outcomes. We nd that consumer search for camcorders at Amazon.com is typically limited
to little over 10 choice options, and that this aects the estimates of own and cross elasticities. In a
policy simulation, we also nd that the vast majority of the households benet from the Amazon.com's
product recommendations via lower search costs.
Keywords: cost-benet analysis, optimal sequential search, demand for durable goods, information
economics, consideration sets
вҲ—The authors are grateful to seminar participants at the 2009 Marketing Dynamics Conference in Waikato (New Zealand),
Dartmouth College, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Georgia Tech, GSB Stanford University, GSB University of Chicago, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, National University of Singapore, Santa Clara University, Tilburg University, and
the University of Texas, Dallas. We also thank participants at the 2009 QME conference participants and Chad Syverson in
particular for comments and feedback.
вҖ  Jun B. Kim is Assistant Professor of Management at Georgia Institute of Technology.
вҖЎ Paulo Albuquerque is Assistant Professor of Marketing at the Simon Graduate School of Business, University of Rochester
В§ Bart J. Bronnenberg is Professor of Marketing, and CentER Research Fellow, Tilburg University. Bronnenberg grateful
acknowledges EU funding from the Marie Curie Program (IRG 230962)
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267
1 Introduction
Online demand for consumer durables and search goods is large and rapidly growing. Comscore (2007)
estimates that non-travel U.S. online consumer spending in 2006 reached $102.1 billion. Jupiter Media
Metrix (2004) estimated U.S. online consumer spending of $65 billion in 2004, with $20.2 billion on durable
consumer search goods, and another $8.3 billion on information goods. The Comscore report shows that the
fastest growing e-commerce categories include durable consumer goods such as video consoles, consumer
electronics, furniture, appliances, and equipment, as well as information goods such as books and magazines,
music, and software. These categories saw annual growth rates for 2007 of 25% to 50% range. PC World
reported in 2007 that the appeal of online shopping is growing. Between August 2006 and the same
month a year later, 14 percent of the $159 billion that U.S. shoppers spent on consumer electronics was
spent online, up from 5 percent a year earlier, according to the Consumer Electronics Association.
In this paper, we seek to understand online demand by studying the product information acquisition
for durable search goods and/or information goods at Amazon.com using aggregated histories of search
behavior, which provides us with a unique opportunity to directly observe category-level consumer browsing
behaviors. Our premise is that we can learn about the preferences of consumers by studying their shopping
behaviors. That is, because the examination and inspection of goods or services come at the cost of
the consumer's time and eort, search outcomes become informative about what the consumer wants.
Observing the particular region of the attribute space in which a consumer invests time browsing products
may teach us something about her preferences. Specically, our proposal is to treat browsing behavior
as the outcome of an optimal sequential search process across choice options for which the consumer has
dierent expectations and uncertainties. In addition, these choice options need not all be equally accessible
and may be oered to consumers at dierent search costs (for instance through the use of seller sponsored
recommendation engines). Recognizing that the three demand primitives - expectations, uncertainties, and
search cost - can be changed by interested parties, e.g., manufacturers or policy makers, the substantive
goal of this paper is to analyze the impact of limited search on choice decisions of the consumers and on the
competitive market structure. Methodologically, we introduce an optimal sequential search process into a
model of choice and identify the demand parameters of interest from the search data.
Table 1 presents an example of viewing data for camcorders obtained from Amazon.com. The table lists
products that were viewed by consumers conditional on viewing a particular (or a focal) product, the Sony
DCR-DVD108. In addition, the order in which these products are listed is determined by an Amazon.com
algorithm that uses the frequency of same-session viewing of the focal product and the other products. 1
1 This data generating mechanism is explained separately in the data section.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267
The table does not list all existing 300+ camcorder options and reects the fact that some options are
seldom or never viewed together with the focal product by any consumer in the same online session. The
data in Table 1 exist for each of the camcorder options as the focal product. Because the products in the
view list are rank ordered, we refer to these data as the view-rank data. The paper shows that, across
viewed products, the view-rank data are informative about substitution, and that from viewed to non-
viewed products, the data imply either low or lack of substitution. For durable goods, where meaningful
observations of consumer switching are usually very limited, the premise of this paper is that the view-rank
data are in the spirit of revealed measures of substitution.
A related premise is that the view-rank data can be used to estimate the demand system. This would
be of interest to practitioners and policy makers because the Amazon.com view-rank data are publicly
available, and contain cross-product information that is not present in reports of sales volume or market
shares.
The general approach in the paper is to model the view-rank data as the aggregation across consumers
of individual-level optimal search sequences, in which each consumer tries to maximize her expected util-
ity, taking into account the search costs of the alternatives that she inspects. At the individual level,
our approach yields a probabilistic model of optimal search set formation, is not subject to the curse of
dimensionality, and is purposely suited to be estimable using the view-rank data. Using data experiments,
we nd that the model is successful at identifying the parameters of a choice-based demand system with
random eects. In addition, the model correctly identies search cost and search set size.
From an application of our model to the Amazon.com camcorder category, we nd the following results.
The median (average) search set contains 11 (14) products, with about 40% of consumers searching less
than ve products out of a total of over 90 products. We nd that the cost of search is signicant and is
subject to consumer heterogeneity. The search cost is lowered for products which appear more frequently
at Amazon.com, measured by the total number of references to the product. We also nd that online
competition between many products is eectively 0, because many products are not jointly searched by
consumers. In fact, when looking at the estimated frequency of co-viewership of two products, we nd that
the large majority of all possible product pairs, about 70%, is viewed by less than 5% of the population. This
implies severe limits on substitution, which in turn causes many cross-price elasticities to be numerically
zero . Finally, our results show that almost everyone benets from the product references that selectively
lower search costs at Amazon.com
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the background literature.
Section 3 outlines the model. Section 4 presents the data and discusses the Amazon.com's data generation
process. Section 5 explains model operationalization and estimation, and discusses empirical identication.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

View-rank Brand Media format Optical Zoom В·В·В· Price
1 SONY DVD 25 В·В·В· $443.32
2 PANASONIC MINIDV 32 В·В·В· $248.11
3 SONY DVD 20 В·В·В· $539.00
4 SONY HD 10 В·В·В· $665.20
5 SONY HD 40 В·В·В· $509.84
6 SONY MINIDV 40 В·В·В· $299.99
7 SONY MINIDV 25 В·В·В· $363.88
8 PANASONIC DVD 30 В·В·В· $347.55
9 SONY MINIDV 20 В·В·В· $257.43
10 CANON DVD 25 В·В·В· $345.99
11 SONY MINIDV 10 В·В·В· $552.42
12 HITACHI DVD 10 В·В·В· $378.45
13 SONY DVD 10 В·В·В· $790.22
...
...
...
...
...
37 SONY DVD 10 В·В·В· $752.75
38 CANON DVD 35 В·В·В· $354.78
39 CANON DVD 35 В·В·В· $376.57
40 PANASONIC MINIDV 32 В·В·В· $289.39
41 SONY HD 25 В·В·В· $554.14
42 JVC MINIDV 32 В·В·В· $488.88
43 PANASONIC DVD 32 В·В·В· $361.81
Table 1: Product alternatives searched at Amazon.com, in May 2007, given search of a Sony Camcorder
with DVD media format, 40 Г— optical zoom, 2.5-Inch swivel screen, etc., selling at $328
Section 6 presents evidence from numerical experiments to show that the model is identied. Section 7
presents empirical results, model robustness checks, and model validations. Section 8 contains two policy
experiments and describes managerial implications. Section 9 concludes.
2 Background
Marketing scholars and economists have long recognized that consumers do not in general search or consider
the universal choice set, due to reasons such as non-zero search cost, product proliferation, and preference
dispersion (e.g., Hauser and Wernerfelt 1989; Howard and Sheth 1969; Nelson 1970; Stigler 1961). The
recent popularity of the choice based demand system has brought renewed attention to the issue of modeling
choice sets and the concerns exist that not taking into account the limited nature of choice sets leads to
biased estimates of demand (Bruno and Vilcassim 2008; Chiang, Chib, and Narasimhan 1999; Goeree
2008). Papers in this tradition specify a probability of a product being known (Goeree 2008) or accessible
(Bruno and Vilcassim 2008) that is not the outcome of an optimal search process but simply constitutes
a consumer response to rms' actions. In this paper, we advocate that such responses can be measured
in the context of how they aect the consumer's search strategies, and that if one has access to outcomes
of search behavior, as we do here, those become informative of important demand primitives when viewed
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

through the lens of optimal information search.
Understanding consumer information search has been an important topic in both marketing and eco-
nomics and hence research on consumer information acquisition abounds. Starting with Stigler (1961),
early research on consumer information acquisition focused on consumers searching for price-quotes in
homogeneous goods markets at some eort. Extending the scope of consumer search to issues of market
outcomes, several authors theorized that limited consumer information search may have a signicant im-
pact on market structure (Diamond 1971; Nelson 1974; Anderson and Renault 1999). In this paper, we
model consumer search behavior not only to evaluate market structure issues, but also to evaluate the
impact of changing search costs by rms on consumer surplus.
We model the consumer's willingness to search for choice options by assuming that the consumer is
motivated to search only if she benets from doing so. There is already a tradition in the consideration set
literature to represent consideration sets as the outcome of non-sequential search (Roberts and Lattin 1991;
Mehta, Rajiv and Srinivasan 2003). This tradition rests on the xed sample strategy proposed in Stigler
(1961) as an optimal search policy for a consumer in a commodities goods market under price uncertainty.
In contrast, McCall (1965) and Nelson (1970) argue that a sequential search strategy is optimal in terms of
total cost 2 and since we additionally believe that online search is more correctly captured as a sequential
process, we will model online search for information in this study as a sequential process and use the
theory of optimal sequential search. Seminal contributions to sequential search theory have been made
by Weitzman (1979), in the case of single agent problems and by Reinganum (1982, 1983) in the case of
multiple agent problems. We implement the optimal search strategies of these papers into a single-agent
random utility choice model.
In contrast to a large volume of theoretical work, there has been relatively limited empirical research on
consumer information search using secondary data. Two recent exceptions are papers on empirical search
for commodities (Hong and Shum 2006) and for dierentiated products (HortaГ§su and Syverson 2004).
In the former, the authors devise a model that translates the price dispersion into heterogeneous search
cost across population. In the latter, the authors develop a model to translate the utility distribution into
heterogenous search cost. In our case, like HortaГ§su and Syverson (2004), we model search for dierentiated
products, but unlike them, we have collected direct measures of search outcomes, allowing us to estimate
a more general demand model. For instance, in contrast to the homogeneous demand model in HortaГ§su
and Syverson (2004), we believe that information about which products tend to be viewed together allows
us to estimate heterogeneous consumer preferences in a dierentiated product category. 3
2 Actually, block-sampled search strategies have been argued to be even better (see e.g., Morgan and Manning 1985).
However, in online search such strategies can not be executed and therefore they are not considered here.
3 For a comprehensive review of several empirical applications, see Moraga-GonzГЎles (2006).
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

With our choice model that includes optimal sequential search, we seek to explore the inuence of
retailer product recommendations, a mechanism to selectively lower search costs, on consumer search
behavior and its impact on market structure. Given the popularity and ubiquity of recommendations at
many online stores, it is of practical and academic interest to investigate how recommendations aect
the consumer information and product search decisions. In behavioral work, Huang and Chen (2006)
report that the recommendations of other consumers inuence the choices of subjects more eectively than
recommendations from an expert. Senecal and Nantel (2004) also show that retailer recommendations will
signicantly aect demand.
3 A demand model with costly sequential product search
3.1 Utility
Our modeling assumptions at the individual level are as follows. Consumer i has a utility for product
j = 1,...,J that is equal to
uij =Vij +eij (1)
with
Vij = Xjbi
bi вҲј N(b,B )
eij вҲј N(0,Пғ 2
ij),
where Xj is a row vector of product characteristics and bi is a vector that represents individual-specic
sensitivities to product characteristics. We assume the matrix B is diagonal. The outside good is the
(J + 1)st alternative, and the consumer is aware of the option not to buy. This option does not require a
search and is available at no cost.
The utility function contains an expectation of Vij and an unknown component of utility, eij. Our
interpretation is that this decomposition partitions what the consumer knows and does not know into Vij
and eij, and the consumer's goal of search is to resolve eij 4 . The most relevant attributes, whose values
are dened by Vij, are accessible from general category information displays without retrieving the product
detail web page, 5 thus facilitating the existence of an expectation Vij prior to search. Before accessing a
4 Our interpretation is consistent with Nelson (1970) who denes consumer search as an information problem to fully
evaluate the utility of each option.
5 In the digital camcorder category page at Amazon.com, consumers have access to important product characteristics in
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

product page, knowledgeable consumers may have lower variance eij's and less knowledgeable consumers
may have higher-variance eij's. When consumers request the product detail web page, they see more details
about the product, which resolves eij.
Resolving eij upon search comes at some cost. We introduce product and individual specic search
cost, cij, which we interpret mainly as time spent on discovering and evaluating the product. 6 We model
search cost as a log normally distributed random eect
cijвҲқ exp (LjОіi), (2)
with
ОіiвҲјN(Оі, О“),
where the matrix О“ is diagonal. The lognormal specication ensures that the sign of cij is positive,
consistent with theory. The cost attributes Lj describe, for instance, the accessibility of product j and are
assumed to be known by the consumers. For instance, it may contain the appearance frequency of product
j at the store or the number of times it is recommended.
The consumer's search and choice process are the outcome of her desire to maximize expected utility
minus total search cost. This involves contrasting the marginal benet and marginal cost of search. The
objective of the analyst is to estimate b, B, Оі, and О“ from data. 7
3.2 A model of sequential search
In sequential search, a consumer decides to stop or continue search each time after having searched a
product. The theory of optimal sequential search states that consumers only continue search if the marginal
benets of doing so outweigh the marginal costs.
Utility uij of consumer i for product j is Vij +eij. Dene uвҲ—
i at any stage of the search process as
the highest utility among the searched products thus far. The consumer's expected marginal benet from
search of product j is
Bij (uвҲ—
i ) =
вҲ« вҲһ
uвҲ—
i
(uijвҲ’uвҲ—
i )f (uij)duij, (3)
where f(В·) is the probability density distribution of uij. The marginal benet is the expectation of the
camcorder such as brand, price, media format, zoom, pixel number, and the dimension for all products in this category.
6 Search cost is dierent between consumer packaged goods and consumer durables. For packaged goods in which experience
is more easily obtained, mental maintenance and processing cost constitute the majority of search cost (Lattin and Roberts
1991). For one-time purchases such as consumer durable goods, it is more likely that search costs are determined by the
time spent on searching for more information and the need for evaluation. Therefore in the context of digital camcorders, we
interpret search cost as the opportunity cost of time invested in identifying and evaluating another candidate product.
7 In the empirical analysis, we will assume that Пғ2
ij = 1, but in the modeling section we wish to keep the level of product
uncertainty general.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

utility for j given that it is higher than uвҲ—
i , multiplied by the probability that uij exceeds uвҲ—
i.8 Note that the
benet of search only depends on the arrangement of utility above uвҲ—
i. The left tail of the utility distribution
below uвҲ—
i can be arbitrarily rearranged without aecting search or choice.
The goal of the consumer is, given the current best option , to maximize expected utility minus incurred
search cost over a set of options that, at the individual level, are characterized by product specic mean
utilities, Vij, product specic search costs, cij, and product specic uncertainties, captured by Пғ2
ij. This
implies that the consumer continues search if there exists at least one j such that
cij <Bij (uвҲ—
i ), (4)
i.e., if the expected marginal benet of searching is larger than the marginal cost, cij.
The optimal sequential search strategy can be formalized as follows. First, partition the set of options
into SiвҲӘ ВҜSi, with Si containing all searched options and ВҜSi containing all non-searched options. All
decision relevant information about Si is contained in uвҲ—
i = maxjвҲҲSi
{
uij,ei(J+1)
}
, provided we assign 0
to the deterministic component of utility for the outside good.
At any point in the search process, the state of the system is given by
(
uвҲ—
i, ВҜSi
)
. Dene the value function
W
(
uвҲ—
i, ВҜSi
)
as the expected (discounted) value of following an optimal search policy, from the current state
going forward. This value function must satisfy the following Bellman equation (Weitzman 1979)
W (uвҲ—
i, ВҜSi) = max(uвҲ—
i, max
jвҲҲ ВҜSi
(вҲ’cij +ОІiВ· [F (uвҲ—
i )В·W (uвҲ—
i, ВҜSiвҲ’{j})оҙҷ оҙҳоҙ— оҙҡ
uijвүӨuвҲ—
i
+
вҲ« вҲһ
uвҲ—
i
W (uij, ВҜSiвҲ’{j})f(uij)duij
оҙҷ оҙҳоҙ— оҙҡ
uij>uвҲ—
i
])) (5)
This equation says that from state
(
uвҲ—
i, ВҜSi
)
, the consumer can terminate search and collect uвҲ—
i, or the
consumer can search any jвҲҲ ВҜSi. In the latter case, the consumer gets an expectation F (uвҲ—
i )В·W (uвҲ—
i, ВҜSiвҲ’
{j}) +
вҲ«вҲһ
uвҲ—
i
W
(
uij, ВҜSiвҲ’{j}
)
f (uij)duij, which she seeks to maximize across j. Because all online searches
in a single session are conducted in a short time span, we set the discount rate ОІi to 1.
Now we discuss some important modeling assumptions in our proposed search model. First, our model
is a full information model in which the consumers are assumed to have full knowledge about the products
8 This can be seen by writing equation 3 alternatively as
Bij (uвҲ—
i ) = (1вҲ’Fj (uвҲ—
i ))Г—
вҲ« inf
uвҲ—
i
(uijвҲ’uвҲ—
i ) f (uij)(
1вҲ’Fj
(
uвҲ—
i
))duij,
which is the multiplication of the chance that the utility draw is larger than uвҲ—
i and the expected value of a truncated draw
from the distribution of uij above uвҲ—
i
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

and their attribute values. This allows the consumers to form Vij for all products prior to search and
to use them in computing the reservation utilities during the sequential search process. Later in the
empirical section, we conduct a series of robustness tests in which we relax the aforementioned assumption.
In these robustness tests, we assume that consumers have partial knowledge about the products and
investigate whether this partial knowledge assumption meaningfully aects our model estimates. Second,
we assume that E(eijВ·ekl) = 0 and thus that the correlation of the unobserved portion of the utility across
individuals and products is zero. The corresponding consumer behavior underlying this assumption is that
the consumers have well-dened preferences prior to search and do not learn about the products during the
search process 9 . Third, we do not include any context or reference eect in the proposed model of optimal
consumer search. Although we acknowledge that a more comprehensive model should include such eects,
we use the cost-benet framework as the rst-order approximation of the optimal consumer search. Lastly,
we do not model Amazon.com's (potentially) strategic behavior in setting prices and product information
( eij). 10
3.3 The optimal strategy
The solution to the above dynamic program is to continue searching until a utility uвҲ—
i is discovered that
is larger than some limit, which in turn depends on how much option value is still left in the unsearched
set. This limit depends on a quantity that is called a reservation utility. To dene this concept, each
consumer i has a reservation utility zij for each product j that - if she had already found a product with
that utility - leaves her indierent between searching and not searching j. In other words, the reservation
utility zij obeys the following equation (see also equation 4, above):
cij =Bij (zij) =
вҲ« вҲһ
zij
(uijвҲ’zij)f (uij)duij. (6)
Thus, the reservation utilities solve zij =BвҲ’1
ij (cij). The estimation section establishes that Bij is monotonic
and a separate appendix provides the details of computation of zij including its existence and uniqueness.
The optimal search strategy (see, e.g., Weitzman 1979) that solves the consumer's maximization problem
of equation 5 has three components; a selection rule, which determines the ordering of the search sequence,
a stopping rule, which determines the length of the search sequence, and a choice rule.
9 We discuss this topic in detail in the next section.
10 Amazon.com does not dierentiate prices or product information across consumers. We allow for exible product xed
eects in the model, thereby reducing the potential for endogeneity biases stemming from potentially strategic prices or supply
of product information. We acknowledge that the issue is important and warrants future study. The issue of how much and
which product information Amazon.com should supply in order to maximize prots is interesting but is outside the scope of
this paper.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

1. Selection rule: Compute all reservation utilities zij and sort them in descending order. If a product is
to be searched, it should be the product with the highest reservation utility zij among the products
not yet searched.
2. Stopping rule: Stop searching when the highest utility obtained so far, uвҲ—
i, is greater than maxjвҲҲ ВҜSi (zij)
among the unsearched items.
3. Choice rule: Once search stops, collect uвҲ—
i by choosing the maximum utility alternative in Si.
We note that this search and choice process can accommodate that some consumers do not search at all.
Indeed, consumers for whom maxj (zij)< 0 for all j will not nd it worth their time to search brands. They
will choose the outside good. 11 The same process can also accommodate that some consumers just browse
but do not buy. For such consumers, maxjвҲҲSi (zij)> 0, but maxjвҲҲSi (uij)< 0. These two statements are
not in conict, as will be seen below. These consumers will also choose the outside good.
We assume that the optimal selection and stopping rules above are derived assuming information
obtained by searching one product does not aect the knowledge of other products. That is, we do not
assume consumer learning during the search process. From the modeling perspective, we assume that eij
are independent given Vij during the search process. The current consumer behavior literature advocates
that this is a reasonable assumption for consumers engaging in search processes (Moorthy, Ratchford, and
Talukdar 1997).
Two important points need to be made. First, given a choice set, the choice model above is not a probit
model. For instance, given the stopping rule above, search beyond item k is continued only if the utility
draw for eik is low enough. This implies that conditional on observing a specic choice set, the eij are
not distributed normal with mean 0 and variance Пғ2
ij. Therefore, given search, choice probabilities do not
follow a standard probit.
Second, Chiang, Chib and Narasimhan (1999) mention that identication of choice sets (or in this case:
search sets) is subject to the curse of dimensionality. Indeed, in a non-sequential search process, with J
possible alternatives, there exist 2JвҲ’ 1 possible search sets. This large number of permutations would
render the computation of the search frequency of any given product impossible with universal choice set
sizes of J = 300+ at Amazon.com. However, an important computational windfall of the sequential search
process is that it is not subject to the curse of dimensionality. Given the selection rule above, there are only
J possible optimal choice sets at the individual level. Given a set of individual level parameters, there will
be an ordering of the choice alternatives along their reservation utilities zij, and the consumer optimally
11 Note that because we estimate our model with search data, we assume that all consumers search at least one product.
However, the model actually accommodates non-search behavior.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

0 0.5 1 1.5 2
вҲ’1
0
1
2
3
c
z
0 1 2 3 4
0
1
2
3
4
5
Пғ 2
z
Figure 1: The relation between search cost, c, product uncertainty, Пғ2, and search attractiveness, z.
samples these choice alternatives in descending order. Thus, if the zij can be computed, the contents of a
search set of size m is known. In sum, whereas, across consumers, the model allows for the existence of any
of the 2J possible search sets as a consequence of consumer heterogeneity, at the individual level only J of
these sets can be an outcome of the optimal sequential search process that belongs to a particular vector
of individual parameters.
Before completing the model, we investigate some properties of the search sequence by means of an
example.
3.4 Some characteristics of the search sequence
In Figure 1, we plot the relation between c, Пғ2, and z, under the assumption of normality of eij. The
left hand panel varies search cost from 0 to 2, and measures the change in the reservation utility zij. For
reference, in this example we choose Vij = 1 and Пғ2
ij = 1. The zij, the reservation utility, or more intuitively
the relative attractiveness of searching j, is decreasing in its search cost. As search cost increases, zij goes
to VijвҲ’cij. This implies that as search costs increase relative to product uncertainty, the attractiveness
of search tends to go to the expected utility net of search cost. On the other hand, if search costs are low
relative to product uncertainty, or product uncertainty is high relative to search cost, zij goes to innity.
Indeed, if it is free to search, the option value (upside) of searching any product that has utility support
on R+ is innite.
The relation between Пғ2 and z in the right hand side panel shows the option value of uncertain prospects.
For reference, in this graph Vij = 1 and cij = 0.1. As outlined above, in sequential search, the search value
of a product is determined by its upside. That is, anything lower than the current maximum uвҲ—
i is irrelevant.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

Per consequence, the reservation utility zij is increasing in product variance. As a natural consequence, if
novice consumers are characterized by having high Пғ2
ij relative to Vij, they will tend to have higher zij and
thus search more than consumers who have more experience. For completeness, we note that zij increases
linearly in Vij.
3.5 Inclusion probabilities and set occurrence
Our data are a function of the frequency with which products are being viewed or searched, and therefore
we seek to derive the probability ПҖij that a given product j is included in the optimal search set of consumer
i. Consider that we know zij and Vij for each individual and product. With some abuse of notation, denote
the rank of zij by r, with r(1) returning the index j of the highest ranked zij and r(J) returning the index j
with the lowest ranked zij for individual i. From these denitions, ПҖi,r(1) is the inclusion probability of the
product with the highest ranked zij for consumer i, and ПҖi,r(j) is the inclusion probability of the product
with the jth highest ranked zij.
The contents of set Sik is fully determined by the selection rule (ranking on z) and the stopping rule
(the size k). The probability ПҖi,r(j) that product r(j) is in the set, is equal to the probability that the rst
jвҲ’ 1 draws of utilities all fell short of zi,r(j) (which is less than zi,r(jвҲ’1) by the selection rule above). Thus,
the inclusion probability of product r(j) is
ПҖi,r(j) = Pr
(
maxjвҲ’1
k=1
(
Vi,r(k) +ei,r(k)
)
<z i,r(j)
)
Мё (7)
=
jвҲ’1вҲҸ
k=1
F
(
zi,r(j)вҲ’Vi,r(k)
)
, j > 1 (8)
with ПҖi,r(1) = 112 and F (В·) is the cumulative probability distribution of eij, which in our case is the normal
distribution with mean 0 and variance Пғ2
ij.
There are three useful properties of these probabilities of inclusion.
1. First, it is trivial to show that ПҖi,r(j) >ПҖ i,r(j+1), or the inclusion probability of the (j + 1)th product
is always less than the inclusion probability of the jth product.
2. Second, given the sequential nature of search and the selection rules of the optimal strategy, the
probability that r (j) and r (j +k) occur together in a set is equal to the probability that r (j +k) is
in the set.
ПҖi,{r(j) and r(j+k)} =ПҖi,r(j+k) = min
(
ПҖi,r(j),ПҖi,r(j+k)
)
, (9)
12 Because our data are predicated on the occurrence of search, consumers search at least one product.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

where the last step is from the rst property. In the estimation section, we will use the last formulation
of this property, when we need to determine the probability that two product j and k are jointly in
the set.
3. Third, given the sequential nature of choice and the independence of the eij, the probability that
the set Sik occurs can be computed as follows. First, recall that Sik is the optimal set of size k for
individual i. The probability that Sik occurs is equal to the probability that search continues beyond
r (kвҲ’ 1) minus the probability of continuing search beyond r (k). This is equal to the chance that
r (k) is in the choice set minus the chance that r (k + 1) is in the choice set of consumer i. Thus
Pr
(
Si,r(k)
)
=ПҖi,r(k)вҲ’ПҖi,r(k+1). (10)
This concludes the statement of the individual-level model. The aggregation to the level at which Ama-
zon.com reports its data is explained in the estimation section. For completeness, it is also explained that
an alternative to the approach in this subsection is to use draws of the eij and compute realizations of
the process. This would lead to less computation at the individual level, but at the aggregate level we
would have to use a frequency estimator for market level behavior, whereas using the model above, we can
integrate over a probability model with far greater precision.
4 Data
4.1 The view-rank data
We have collected, on a regular basis, the view-rank data for all camcorder products from May 2006 until
October 2007. To ensure that the analysis is based on a suciently large sample of viewing behaviors, and
because we do not have information about the temporal window used by Amazon.com in computing the
view-rank data, we use the products that appear throughout the data collection period and aggregated
their rank orders in the view-rank data to the monthly level. 13 We use data from the month of May 2007.
At rst, we extracted top 200 camcorders from the Amazon.com website, based on sales rank. We
13 We use average sales price in our analysis. In the data, we observe that the positions of products in the view-rank lists
uctuate over time. This calls for an averaging mechanism for the dierent positions of a product in the view-lists over time.
For this averaging procedure, we use the percentile ranking similar to Bajari, Fox and Ryan (2007). In the percentile ranking,
the product with the highest rank among J products is coded as J, not 1. Then we normalize the rank of product j at time
t as,
ЛҶrjt = rjt
maxk{rkt} (11)
Once we compute ЛҶrjt , the percentile ranking of the product j at t, we compute the average ranking of product j as the mean
of the daily percentile ranking as ЛҶrj = 1
T
вҲ‘
t ЛҶrjt .
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

Attributes Ranges
Brand Sony (31), Panasonic (19), Canon (15), JVC (15), other (11)
Media Formats MiniDV (33), DVD (30), FM(9), HD (19)
Price $ 530 (mean), $ 263 (std. dev.)
Form Compact (8), Conventional (83)
High-Denition Yes (14), No (77)
Pixel 1.67M (mean), 1.45M (std. dev.)
Zoom 19.8 (mean), 10.9 (std. dev.)
Table 2: Description of the choice options in the empirical data (with frequency of occurrence in parenthesis)
removed the smaller players such as Aiptek, Samsonic and DXG who cater to the lowest-price tier only
with dierent types of camcorders and which have very low sales-rank. We also removed from the analysis
those camcorders on which we had no observations of media format 14 , and all camcorders of professional
grade. After applying these data lters, we are left with 91 choice alternatives. The summary statistics of
the products are shown in Table 2.
All 91 products have their own view-rank lists, i.e., all of the products have a list from which we
observe which other products are closely related, in the order of decreasing relationship. On average, a
given product appears 24 out of 90 times on other product's view list with a standard deviation of 18. The
minimum number of appearances is 0 while the maximum is 83.
Table 3 gives the results of a descriptive regression of the number of appearances on the view-lists. Note
that Sony, Panasonic, and Canon appear most frequently in the view-rank lists. Further, high denition
and pixel size improve the number of appearances, while higher price reduces it. We conclude that the
number of appearances on the view-rank data depends on demand drivers such as product attributes and
prices.
We point out the rich information embedded in the Amazon view-rank data. For every focal product k,
Amazon.com provides a list of top N most related products among the remaining JвҲ’ 1 products. 15 Also,
product k may appear on the view-rank lists of other JвҲ’ 1 products. Therefore, the data reveal a complex
pattern of relations between a given product k and the other JвҲ’ 1 products.
Lastly, we discuss the type of consumers who we believe are represented in the product search data.
Moe (2003) classies online store browsing behavior of consumers into four dierent categories - directed
buying, search and deliberation, hedonic browsing, and knowledge building. She also classies the contents
of e-commerce web pages into three dierent categories: product, category, and information pages. She
reports that the consumers in directed buying mode will frequently visit the product page while the
consumers in the mode of search and deliberation focus on both product and category pages. Hedonic
14 The media formats of the products in the data include ash memory(FM) and hard drive(HD).
15 During the data collection period, Amazon.com listed up to 45 products that are related to the focal product.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

Variable ОІ std.err.
Intercept -10.64 22.71
Sony 51.80 15.16
Panasonic 48.61 14.56
Canon 44.61 14.09
JVC 30.42 14.51
Samsung 36.09 12.79
MiniDV -13.42 4.21
DVD -22.58 4.34
FM -18.69 9.00
Compact 1.80 8.88
High Denition 16.10 5.38
Zoom 0.17 0.20
Screen Size 1.28 6.28
Pixel 6.49 1.64
Price -36.40 9.28
Appearance frequency 1.65 0.23
R 2 0.60
Table 3: Descriptive regression of the frequency of product appearance against product characteristics
browsers focus on category pages while consumers in knowledge building will focus on information pages.
Montgomery et. al (2004) also identify that the focus of the consumers in the buying mode is product detail
pages. Amazon.com's product search data are based on the number of consumers who requested product
detail pages from the Amazon.com server. Therefore, consistent with previous research, we conjecture that
Amazon.com's product search data predominantly reect the behaviors of consumers in either buying or
search phase with a vested interest in the product category.
4.2 Other measures of search at Amazon.com
We now discuss other data that are available at Amazon.com. At each product detail page, Amazon.com
lists up to four top products purchased by past consumers who searched the product in the current detail
page. These product references serve as shortcuts to other closely relevant products, thereby reducing
consumers' search costs for potentially attractive products. We use the number or frequency of appearances
of each product aggregated across other product pages as an explanatory variable that aects search cost.
For instance, we hypothesize that a product that appears frequently at the store level will have a smaller
search cost compared to products that do not. Hereafter, Lj denotes the frequency of appearances of
product j over all product pages. 16
16 It is important to ensure that there is no multi-collinearity between Lj and other product characteristics we use in our
empirical analysis. In order to verify this, we regressed Lj on the product attributes such as brands, media formats, prices and
etc. We nd that the model t is relatively low ( R2 = 0.12) and none of the coecients are signicant, thereby supporting a
lack or low level of multi-collinearity between Lj and other product characteristics.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

4.3 Amazon.com's generation of view-rank data
Amazon lists a set of closely related products for each focal product in the order of decreasing strength
of relationship. According to the Amazon.com US Patent 6,912,505 B2 (Linden et al. 2005), the strength
of the relationship between two products, j (focal product) and k (related product), is measured by a
commonality index, ( CIjk ), dened as
CIjk = njk
вҲҡnjВ·вҲҡnk
, (12)
where nj and nk are the numbers of consumers who viewed products j and k, respectively, and njk is the
number of consumers who viewed products j and k together in the same session. Note that nj, nkвүҘnjk
and that the commonality index is bounded between 0 and 1. The higher the commonality index is, the
stronger the relationship is between two products. Amazon.com orders its view-rank data, exemplied in
Table 1, according to the computed CIjk for each product. Therefore, if the commonality index between
product j and k is larger than that between product j and в„“, k appears before в„“ on the view list for j. If
we represent the view-rank of k over в„“ on the view list of j by (j,k )вү» (j,в„“ ), then
(j,k )вү» (j,в„“ ) вҶҗвҶ’ CIjk >CI jв„“ (13)
From the view lists in our data, these inequalities are observed directly 17 . We treat these pair-wise inequal-
ities as the dependent variables in our analysis. To this end we use the indicator variables, Ij,kв„“, dened
as
Ij,kв„“ =
пЈұ
пЈҙпЈІ
пЈҙпЈі
1 if (j,k )вү» (j,в„“ )
0 otherwise
(14)
For each product j, there are 0.5Г— (JвҲ’ 1)Г— (JвҲ’ 2) unique inequalities dened by (13). Therefore, across
J products, we theoretically have 0.5Г—JГ— (JвҲ’ 1)Г— (JвҲ’ 2) observed inequalities or pairwise conditional
view-ranks. In principle, these data therefore contain a lot of information about substitution patterns,
because given our sequential search model, the pairwise data are informative of the degree to which two
products are related in search, and therefore in expected utility Vij (as well as other factors such as search
cost).
As mentioned above, our empirical study involves 91 products. For these products, and taking into
account that Amazon.com may truncate view-lists, the total number of observed pairwise ranks is 168,336.
The rank information may contain less information compared to continuous data such as the share in-
17 Not all pairwise combinations are observed. Some products are viewed so infrequently that the view list is truncated by
Amazon.com. While, we do not know the view-rank among products that are not on the view list, we do know the view ranks
among all listed products, and the view ranks of pairs of listed and non-listed products.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

formation. But, there are many observations of view-ranks and given the search model, such data are
informative about substitution and consumer heterogeneity.
5 Estimation
5.1 General approach
The general approach to estimating the parameters of our model is as follows. Given a set of parameters
and draws from the heterogeneous distributions, we rst use the optimal sequential search model to make
forecasts of the unobserved commonality indices CIjk in Equation 12. Below we show how to compute these
forecasts. Next, we assume that the model's forecast of CIjk diers from its true value by a zero-mean error
process and construct a nonlinear least square estimator using the observed {Ij,kв„“} as dependent variables.
We decompose the true commonality index between two products, j and k, as
CIjk = ЛҶCIjk(Оҳ ;X)вҲ’Пөjk, (15)
where CIjk is the unobserved, true commonality index, ЛҶCIjk(Оҳ ;X) is the model's prediction of the com-
monality index given data X and parameters Оҳ, and Пөjk
iid
вҲј N(0, П…2
2 ). This error term allows for aggregate-
level prediction errors, similar to Bresnahan (1987) and Bajari et al. (2007).
Next, we tie the above model to our observations. Unfolding the relations among the products into a
set of pairwise view-ranks, e.g., product j is viewed more often with k than with в„“, we obtain
Pr(Ij,kв„“ = 1) = Pr(CIjв„“ <CI jk) = Pr(Пөj,kв„“ < ЛҶCIjkвҲ’ЛҶCIjв„“) (16)
where Пөj,kв„“ = ПөjkвҲ’Пөjв„“. Given the assumptions about the distribution of Пөjk , the error term, Пөj,kв„“, is an
i.i.d. normal random variable with mean 0 and variance of П…2. Therefore,
Pr (Ij,kв„“ = 1) = ОҰ
(ЛҶCIjk(Оҳ ;X)вҲ’ЛҶCIjв„“(Оҳ ;X)
П…
)
, (17)
where ОҰ is the CDF for the standard normal distribution.
Next, we discuss the sources of the measurement errors Пөjk . First, it is possible that there is sampling
or measurement error in Amazon.com's computation of the CIjk. Second, although we mainly model
consumers engaged in optimal search behavior, the Amazon.com data may contain traces of consumers
in other modes such as hedonic browsing. Third, we aggregate and average a month's data to generate
the pairwise ranks among the products in the product search data. Combined, these forces may introduce
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

measurement error in the dependent variable.
The nonlinear least square estimator in our empirical analysis is dened as
{ОҳвҲ—,П…вҲ—} = arg min
{Оҳ,П…}
вҲ‘
(j,k,в„“)вҲҲS
[Pr (Ij,kв„“ = 1)вҲ’ 1]2, (18)
where j,k,в„“ = 1,...J and S ={(j,k,в„“ )| Ij,kв„“ = 1, jМё=kМё=в„“}. Below, we provide computational details
on how to compute the forecasts ЛҶCIjk . We also explain how the reservation utilities zij can be computed
eciently in estimation.
5.2 Computational details
The commonality index From the denition of the commonality index used by Amazon.com, the
estimator for CIjk is
ЛҶCIjk (Оҳ ;X) = ЛҶnjkвҲҡ
ЛҶnj
вҲҡЛҶnk
, (19)
where ЛҶnj is equal to the forecasted number of simulated individuals that has searched j (given X and
Оҳ) and ЛҶnjk is equal to the forecasted number of individuals who have jointly searched j and k. We can
approximate ЛҶCIjk to an arbitrary degree of precision by computing it on the basis of the simulated search
histories of many pseudo households (draws from the heterogeneity distributions). In terms of our model,
the prediction ЛҶnj is equal to the sum across individuals of the probability that product j is included in the
search set, i.e., using Equation (8),
ЛҶnj =
вҲ‘
i=1,...,I
ПҖij, j = 1,...,J, (20)
where I is the total number of simulated individuals. Further, the prediction ЛҶnjk is equal to the sum across
individuals of the probability that products j and k are both included in the search set, i.e., using Equation
9,
ЛҶnjk =
вҲ‘
i=1,...,I
min (ПҖij,ПҖik), j,k = 1,...,J. (21)
Therefore, the prediction for CIjk is equal to
ЛҶCIjk (Оҳ ;X) =
вҲ‘
i min (ПҖij,ПҖik)вҲҡвҲ‘
iПҖij
вҲҡвҲ‘
iПҖik
(22)
Note that since 0< ЛҶCIjk (Оҳ ;X)< 1 by construction, the predictor is robust.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

Computing reservation utilities The right hand side of Equation 22 involves aggregations of proba-
bility distributions of optimal search sets. These optimal choice sets involve individual level optimal search
sequences over product options sorted in descending order of reservation utilities, zij. To compute the
reservation utilities zij in estimation, we develop the following results in Appendix A. First, the reservation
utilities follow
zij =Vij +О¶
(cij
Пғij
)
Г—Пғij, (23)
where О¶
(
cij
Пғij
)
is a scalar function that translates standardized search cost cij/Пғij into a multiplier on Пғij.
Thus, given the assumptions of the model, the reservations utilities are simply the expected utilities Vij
plus a function of search cost cij times the uncertainty about the product Пғij.
Second, the appendix shows that the function О¶ (x) solves the following implicit equation
x = (1вҲ’ ОҰ (О¶)) (О» (О¶)вҲ’О¶), (24)
where ОҰ is the cumulative standard normal distribution, and О» is the standard normal Hazard rate,
ПҶ (О¶)/ (1вҲ’ ОҰ (О¶)) in which ПҶ is the standard normal probability distribution function. The function x (О¶)
in Equation 24 is further shown to be continuous and monotonic. Hence, the inversion to the function О¶ (x)
exists. Although the precise solution of Equation 24 is computationally expensive, it can be solved once for
a large set of x outside the estimation algorithm. That is, О¶ (x) does not need to be solved in estimation
because it does not directly involve any model parameters. Armed with a table of x and О¶ (x), we can -
during estimation - substitute x = cij
Пғij
and look up О¶ (x) from the table, using an interpolation step if the
table of О¶ ( ) only covers a neighborhood of x = cij
Пғij
. These computational steps in estimation can be made
arbitrarily precise and are inexpensive. Thus, we do not need to iteratively solve the reservation utilities
in estimation.
Third, this decomposition of zij has an intuitive appeal. If search cost cij is low, relative to product
uncertainty Пғij, О¶
(
cij
Пғij
)
can be shown to be large and positive. Thus, in this case, the reservation utility
or attractiveness of search, zij, is equal to Vij plus multiples of Пғij. With low cost, consumers focus on
the upside of the utility distribution. On the other hand, if cij is large, then О¶
(
cij
Пғij
)
turns out to become
negative and the reservation utility zij is less than Vij. 18 In this case, the stopping rule of optimal search
will be met earlier, because it is likely that the realized utility draws of uij is greater than the low reservation
18 We note that these observations are not unique to the Normal distribution. We have derived zij for the Uniform
distribution also. For this case, if utilities are distributed uniform on [VijвҲ’Пғij,V ij +Пғij], we also obtain
zij =Vij +О¶
(cij
Пғij
)
Пғij,
with О¶ () = 1вҲ’ 2
вҲҡ
(). In other words, the decomposition in Equation (23) is virtually identical for the Uniform distribution.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

utilities zik of products in the set of unsearched products k.
5.3 Inference
We use resampling techniques for our standard error computation. Statistical inference based on the
bootstrap resampling technique (Efron and Tibshirani 1993) has been widely used in many disciplines. In
marketing, Horsky and Nelson (2006) used the resampling to compute the standard errors in the presence
of dependencies among the dependent variables.
The basic idea behind the bootstrap is very simple. We rst generate a random sample of same size by
drawing, with replacement, from the original pairwise rank indicators. Such a random sample is considered
as a perturbation from the original data. Next, we estimate the model parameters with the drawn random
sample. We repeat the random sampling and estimation, and use the distribution of parameter estimates to
compute the standard errors. Using bootstrap samples, the standard error of a parameter ОІk is computed
as
s(ОІk) =
оөӘоө«оө«вҲҡ 1
BвҲ’ 1
BвҲ‘
b=1
(
ЛҶОІb
kвҲ’ 1
B
BвҲ‘
b=1
ЛҶОІb
k
)2
, (25)
where ЛҶОІb
k is an estimate of ОІk from bootstrap sample b and B is the total number of bootstrap samples.
In our context, we generate a random sample from the view-rank data, {(j,k )b|j,k = 1,...,J, j Мё=k},
by sampling with replacement from the original view-rank data {(j,k )|j,k = 1,...,J, j Мё=k} and estimate
{Оҳb,П…b} using a bootstrap sample {(j,k )b|В·}. We repeat the estimation with a set of bootstrap resamples
and use the distribution of {Оҳb,П…b} to infer the standard errors of {ОҳвҲ—,П…вҲ—}.
5.4 Discussion of identication
We discuss the empirical identication of the proposed model. Firstly, we discuss the identication of
consumer preferences. We note that the mean consumer preferences for product attributes ( b) are identied
by the correlation between the search frequencies of products inferred by aggregating the view-rank data
across all products and the frequencies of underlying products' attributes. That is, the mean eect of an
attribute is measured by how often the products that share the same attribute appear in the view-rank
data relative to other products that do not share the attribute. We infer the search frequency of a product
from the total number of times a product appears across other product's view-lists and its relative rank
positions to other products within the view-list of each focal product in the view-rank data.
Secondly, there are two information sources for the identication of consumer heterogeneity ( B). The
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

consumer heterogeneity is partially identied by the discrepancy between our predicted search frequencies
of products solely based on the mean consumer preferences and the (observed) search frequencies. Another
unique source for the identication of heterogeneous consumer tastes in our data is the dierent relational
strengths among the products. How often products are searched together or not searched together in the
view-rank lists is very informative about how substitutable the underlying product attributes are. This
unique information is critical in estimating the consumer heterogeneity.
Thirdly, we discuss the identication of consumer search costs. In our search cost specication, we
conjecture that the search cost is a function of appearance frequency of products. From the perspective
of empirical identication, we can treat the appearance frequency of products as another product at-
tribute. Therefore, we can extend our discussion on the identications of mean and heterogenous consumer
preferences to those of any parameters that relate to search costs. We also depend on the nonlinear func-
tional form in the reservation utility for the separate identication of consumer preference and search cost
parameters. That is, the consumer preferences enter the equation in a non-linear manner (since we need to
integrate the utility out over the truncated error distribution) in Equation 3 while the search cost enters
the equation in a linear manner. This nonlinearity helps us separately identify consumer preferences and
search costs. Lastly, we point out that the mean consumer search cost is identied by the average search
set size implied by the sparsity of products in the view-rank lists across products. Consumers will search
all the products under zero search costs. Under this scenario, all the commonality indices will be unity and
we will observe uniform patterns in the view-rank data across all the products. This is not the case with
the observed view-rank data. Therefore, the mean search cost is identied by the average consumer search
set size that best matches the sparsity of an average product in the the view-rank lists across products.
6 Data experiment
We conduct a numerical experiment to verify that the model can be identied from view-rank data. To
this end, we create 32 product options with attributes that were arbitrarily named Sony, Panasonic,
Zoom > 10Г—, Media: mini DV, and Media: Hard Drive. In addition, we add a continuous attribute
price. Finally, we assign a value for Product Appearance Frequency, Lj to each of the 32 options.
We choose a random eects specication on all product attributes, a xed eects specication for
search cost, cij = exp (Оі0 +Оі1Lj), and assume a set of values for the parameters. We use Пғ2
ij = 1 as a
normalization. 19 The assumed values for the parameters are chosen with similar magnitudes as those we
19 Note that there is potential for estimating some aspects of these variance terms. Indeed, dierences in product uncertainty
across options would manifest into low Vij that are searched frequently. Therefore, we envision that the model may become
even more general than currently represented once we combine the view-rank with sales-rank data.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

obtained from preliminary empirical results. Next, we draw 50,000 pseudo households from the distribution
of parameters and, for each of these pseudo households, compute the Vij, zij and other relevant quantities
to obtain the optimal search sequence and choice. We then aggregate these sequences according to the
recipe used by Amazon.com 20 to obtain the lists of view-ranks similar to those exemplied in Table 1.
Before we discuss a more detailed identication experiment below, we rst conduct a series of preliminary
view-rank data generation exercises to ensure that the view-rank data actually change as a function of the
assumed parameter values. As a demonstration, we show that the dierent parameters for Media HD
generate dierent view-rank data. Under the current set of true parameters of 2 in (See Table 4), we
observe that HD products have an average rank position of 7.5 (with a standard deviation of 1.6) on the
view-lists across all the products. When we change its mean eect to 3, hence making the HD more
attractive to consumers, HD product's average rank position moves up to 7.25 (2.0). This implies that
these products will be searched more often by the consumers. When we set HD mean parameter to 1
(hence making it less attractive), the average rank position goes down to 7.9 (1.2). We also observe that,
when we increase the HD heterogeneity to 3, HD product's average rank goes down to 8 (2). We report
similar observations with other attributes.
We now discuss the parameter recovery experiment in detail. To estimate the model, we generate 3,000
pseudo households . At each candidate parameter vector, we compute the draws of the expected utilities
Vij and the reservation utilities zij to compute the inclusion probabilities ПҖij. Note again that the zij
takes search cost into account, i.e., low search cost leads to high zij, etc. The 3,000 draws for the ПҖij are
aggregated and computed according to Equation 22, the forecast of the commonality index given a set of
parameter values. During the estimation, the sum of squared errors in Equation 18 is minimized. The
recovered parameters and their corresponding standard errors are shown in Table 4.
As can be seen from Table 4, the recovered parameters are all close to the actual values (well within
sampling errors). The correlation between the actual and the estimated parameters is very high, around
0.99. These observations suggest that the model parameters are identiable from view-rank data. We call
attention to the estimated values of heterogeneity. The variances of the distribution of the random eects
are well recovered. This means that taste variation across consumers in the model is identied. We have
argued above, and the simulation results seem to agree, that this is because the view-rank data allow us
to directly observe which pairs of products substitute well at an aggregate level.
Finally, the model also seems to correctly reproduce the value of the cost parameters. In the empirical
results, we will also investigate heterogeneous search cost specications. We conclude from this numerical
20 There are two ways to do this step. We can generate search histories and use a frequency estimator to compute ЛҶnj and
ЛҶnjk. We can also compute the ПҖij and ПҖi(j and k) directly without drawing search histories. Both methods of data generation
were used with similar results albeit that the second method is likely more precise with fewer pseudo households.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

True Estimated
parameter values values (s.e.)
mean eects Sony 1 1.10 (0.19)
Panasonic -1 вҲ’0.65 (0.72)
Zoom > 10Г— 1 1.05 (0.22)
Media: mini DV -1 вҲ’0.70 (0.62)
Media: Hard Drive 2 2.13 (0.20)
Price -2 вҲ’2.14 (0.46)
heterogeneity Sony 1 0.92 (0.20)
Panasonic 2 2.11 (0.22)
Zoom > 10Г— 1 1.03 (0.09)
Media HD 2 2.11 (0.22)
Media mini DV 1 0.95 (0.14)
Price 1 0.78 (0.78)
cost base cost -2 вҲ’1.97 (0.24)
eect of links -3 вҲ’3.09 (0.36)
standard deviation of CI П… 0.14 0.15 (0.01)
Number of observations 20
Sum of squared errors 2,390
Table 4: Estimation results from the numerical experiment
experiment that the model parameters are identied from the view-rank data.
7 Empirical analysis
7.1 Specication
We use a random coecients discrete choice model to represent the utility component of a consumer's
product search decisions. In the utility specication, we represent a product as a bundle of characteristics.
We do not include a product-specic intercept in the utility function. Utility is modeled as
uij =XjОІiвҲ’ОұiPj +eij, (26)
where Xj is a row vector of product j's characteristics and Pj is j's price. ОІi is a K-dimensional (column)
vector that represents the individual-specic sensitivities to product characteristics. eij is a normally
distributed random error term with mean 0 and variance Пғ2 and is i.i.d. across individuals and products.
We set Пғ2 = 1 for all i and j. We include K = 7 product characteristics in the utility specication. 21 We
additionally specify random coecients on all these eects. For reasons of parsimony, we use one common
heterogeneity parameter for all brands, as well as for all media formats. Further, we impose a theory-driven
21 We include brand, media format, form, high denition, zoom, screen size, and pixels. It is possible that factors outside
Amazon.com, such as advertising, could aect consumer search. However, given the nature of the data in our empirical
analysis, we restrict our modeling eort to the product information available at Amazon.com.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

restriction on the price coecient. 22 In particular,
log(Оұi) вҲј N(ОІp,Пғ 2
p)
ОІi вҲј N(ОІ0, ОЈОІ),
where ОЈ is a diagonal matrix containing the variances of the random eects, Пғ2
k. Search cost is specied 23
as
cij = exp(Оі0i +Оі1iLj), Оі0iвҲјN(Оі0,Пғ 2
Оі0), Оі1iвҲјN(Оі1,Пғ 2
Оі1),
where Lj is the appearance frequency of or references to product j at Amazon.com. The random eects on
search cost reect the dierent search behaviors or strategies across consumers. For instance, consumers
who prefer navigation tools such as sales-ranking or lters will be less responsive to the frequent appearances
of products while searching, and hence this segment of consumers will have low Оі1i.
7.2 Parameter estimates
The estimated parameters are shown in Table 5. 24 Please note that our model estimates and inference
hereafter are conditional on consumer search and (inferred) optimal choice. As was noted earlier, this is
not the limitation of our empirical model since our empirical model can explicitly accommodate outside
goods both in search and in choice. However, the nature of our dependent variables does not allow us to
pragmatically assume the sizes of outside goods.
We check the face validity of the estimated parameters. Sony, the most popular brand, has the largest
mean brand eect. Also, other well known brands (e.g., Panasonic and Canon) have higher mean brand
eects than lesser known others (JVC, Samsung) in the camcorder category. Second, the number of product
appearance frequency at Amazon.com decreases the search cost, as can be inferred from the sign of the
coecient Оі1, which is negative. Among the media formats, we nd that DVD and miniDV are more
popular than FM. We compare our ndings with Gowrisankaran and Rysman (2009) who also estimated
demand parameters in the camcorder category. Our nding on consumer sensitivity to pixel is consistent
22 Past literature supports theory-driven empirical specication (Boatwright et al. 1999). However, we also estimate the
proposed empirical model without the sign restriction on the price coecient, treating it as a normally distributed random
variable with mean and variance. The estimated mean and standard deviation are -0.8 and 2.2, respectively. This implies some
consumers with positive price coecients. However, the managerial implication remains substantially the same since computed
own-price elasticities between these two models are very close with a correlation of 0.99. In addition, their magnitudes are
very similar since the mean and median of the ratios of own price elasticities between the two models are 1.08 and 1.04,
respectively.
23 We acknowledge that there may be other factors that aect consumer search cost such as the way Amazon.com responds
to consumer queries.
24 For our estimation, we draw 1,500 consumers from the joint distribution. By testing dierent numbers of simulated
consumers, we found that consumer size of over 1,000 provides stable parameter estimates.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

Variable mean eect ( s.e.) heterogeneity ( s.e.)
Sony 1.387 (0.363) 0 .793a (0.047)
Panasonic 1.335 (0.349) 0 .793 (0.047)
Canon 1.077 (0.351) 0 .793 (0.047)
JVC 0.536 (0.317) 0 .793 (0.047)
Samsung 0.453 (0.316) 0 .793 (0.047)
MiniDV вҲ’0.457 (0.101) 1 .142b (0.083)
DVD вҲ’0.585 (0.092) 1 .142 (0.083)
FM вҲ’1.439 (0.169) 1 .142 (0.083)
Compact вҲ’1.407 (0.374) 1 .030 (0.141)
Hi-Def 0.924 (0.133) 1 .267 (0.091)
Zoom 0.006 (0.003) 0 .019 (0.003)
Screen Size вҲ’0.307 (0.078) 0 .224 (0.165)
Pixel 0.292 (0.040) 0 .226 (0.028)
log (Price) 1.578 (0.319) 4 .505 (0.767)
search base cost ( Оі0) вҲ’5.076 (0.353) 0 .064 (0.069)
eect of appearance frequency ( Оі1) вҲ’1.365 (0.167) 0 .001 (0.050)
standard deviation of CI ( П…) 0.099 (0.002) NA
Number of inequalities 168, 336
Sum of squared errors 11, 693
a Random eects variance is common across brands
b Random eects variance is common across media formats
Table 5: Estimation results. Standard errors are in parenthesis
with their dynamic demand analysis that pixel is more important compared to zoom or screen size. We
nd a large degree of consumer heterogeneity present for brands, media formats, form (compact), high
denition, and price. 25
7.3 Robustness of the model estimates
Our empirical model assumes that consumers have full knowledge about products in terms of their existence
and their attribute values. We now relax this assumption and discuss how our model estimates change
under the assumption that consumers have partial knowledge of the products. Our ultimate goal is to
check the robustness of the model estimates under varying levels of consumer knowledge. To this end, we
devise a 2 X 2 testing matrix. For each cell in the matrix, we assume dierent contents and quantities of
consumer knowledge. In the contents dimension, the consumers have partial knowledge about the existence
of products (limited product knowledge) or about the attribute values (limited attribute knowledge). In the
quantity dimension, consumers have dierent amount of knowledge. In low (high) condition, we assume that
consumers are aware of 60% (80%) of all products' existence or attribute values. In the implementation, we
25 At the average price coecient, the dierence in valuation between Sony and Panasonic is $10.71 but the distribution of
willingness to pay for Sony has a long right tail. We take this to mean that there are consumers of whom we infer that they
are relatively price insensitive and would not buy a Panasonic over a Sony even at large price advantages of the former. We
note that, Meijer and Rouwendal (2006) and Sonnier et al. (2007) warn that inferences on ratios of two random coecients
in discrete choice models should be made with some caution.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

Low (60%) High (80%)
Limited product 0.977 0.995
Limited attribute 0.969 0.990
Table 6: Parameter correlations under varying assumptions on consumer knowledge
randomly remove products or continuous attribute values across i and j. In the case of limited attribute
knowledge, we assume that consumers impute the missing values using the category-level expectations over
the remaining data.
We re-estimate our models under varying assumptions and compare the parameter estimates thus
obtained with those from our full knowledge model. We nd high correlations between the parameter
estimates in each of the 4 cells and very high correlations among the parameter estimates, ranging as
high as 0.97 вҲј 0.99. Table 6 shows the computed correlations among the parameter estimates for 2 X 2
matrix. As noted, all cells exhibit high correlations, with the high knowledge level cells (80%) show higher
correlations than their low knowledge counterparts. From this analysis, we conclude that our parameter
estimates are robust to alternative assumptions about available products and levels of consumer knowledge.
These results suggest the estimates from the full model can be used to verify the implications of our model
under a broader set of circumstances than under the strict completeness of information assumption that
underlies the model development.
7.4 Model validation
We conduct two out-of-sample model validations. First, we show how well our proposed search model
predicts the actual sales ranks for the same month (May 2007). Since one of the appealing aspects of
our proposed model is to study consumer demand using consumer search data, the proposed validation
using the actual sales information is of a critical interest. Second, we predict the consumer product search
patterns for a dierent month and compare them against the observed consumer search data. This is a full
out of sample validation including prediction of viewing patterns for new combinations of attributes.
Using the model estimates, we predict the market shares by aggregating the individual choices inferred
from the optimal search processes. We compare our sales rank predictions (obtained from the predicted
market shares) against the actual sales ranks observable at Amazon.com. We report that the sales rank
correlation is 0.63 while the hit rates among all pairs of products, i.e., the fraction of correct predictions
of the sales rank comparison between a pair of products, is 0.72. Focusing on top 90% best predicted
products, we achieve an even better sales rank correlation and hit rate of 0.79 and 0.78, respectively. It
is informative to compare these numbers with the identical summary statistics from Roberts and Lattin
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

(1991). Recall that Roberts and Lattin (1991) predicted market shares using individual-level consideration
and choice data. 26 Using the individual consideration data, they achieve a sales rank correlation and hit
rate of 0.75 and 0.78, respectively. These numbers increase to 0.83 in both cases when choice data are used
to predict share ranks and so the predictive ability of the individual level consideration data is comparable
to that of the individual choice data. Thus, at least for the data in Roberts and Lattin (1991), consumer
consideration data appear to be a good proxy for aggregate sales predictions in the absence of such sales
data. Comparing further, the predictive accuracy of our proposed model is similar to that from individual-
level consideration data (hit rates of 0.72 vs 0.78) and to that from choice data (hit rates of 0.72 vs 0.83). If
we remove the bottom 10% worst predicted products, our predictions are even better than those from the
individual consideration data (correlations of 0.79 vs 0.75 and hit rates of 0.78 vs 0.78). We acknowledge
that these are comparisons across dierent data sets, but still submit that this is a notable achievement
since our predictions are based on aggregate search data that are much coarse than the individual level
consideration data used in Roberts and Lattin (1991).
As a second validation exercise, we predict and compare the consumer search patterns for the month
of June 2007 from our model estimates. In contrast to the previous exercise, our goal in this exercise is
to test the predictive ability of the model using the data from a dierent time duration. Among the 90
products in the June data, we observe 7 exits from existing and 6 entries of new products. In addition,
we observe that overlapping products have dierent prices and appearance frequencies. We nd that our
model correctly predicts 89% of all the search patterns of pair-wise inequalities {Ij,kl} in the June data,
and more importantly, it correctly predicts 88% of the view-rank lists of the new 6 products.
We believe that these validations, from two dierent data sources, strongly demonstrate that our em-
pirical model exhibits a high level of predictive ability. We now proceed to a set of detailed analysis using
the model estimates.
7.5 Search set analysis
We next interpret the nature of search from the estimation results by analyzing the implied size and
composition of the individual optimal search sets. To this end, we compute the size and composition of the
choice sets drawing 30,000 pseudo-households from the set of estimated population density of parameters.
For each of these pseudo-households, we compute expected utilities Vij and reservation utilities zij. We
next compute their optimal search sets and use various sample statistics to report on the size and contents
of the individual level search sets.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of the estimated number of products searched per individual. The mean
26 We obtain sales rank predictions from their market share predictions in Table 3.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Optimal search set size
Percentage of consumers(%)
Figure 2: The estimated population distribution of set sizes
of the search set size distribution is 14 while its median value is 11. A large proportion of the population,
about 40%, has a small search set size of less than 5 products. Further, the distribution of search set size
is estimated to have a long right tail, as one might expect, given the relative low cost of search. 27 The
model implies search sets that are a priori realistic in size and that consumers generally do not search for
very many products.
We now comment on some aspects of the contents of the inferred optimal search sets. First, we present
a summary of brand level search set membership. This is important information to manufacturers and
allows them to infer a brand's search frequency among consumers. It is also informative about relative
brand strength or brand presence during the pre-purchase phase. The left hand panel of Figure 3 reveals
that, of all the products searched at Amazon.com, Sony accounts for about 35% of search volume. This
bestows on Sony a large mind share. Panasonic is a second followed by Canon. The right hand panel of
Figure 3 shows the average share of search volume per product by each brand. The rst bar in the graph
shows that a typical Sony product has an average share of 1.1% of the total product search volume. Thus,
from the two graphs, we conclude that the Sony dominates the search process of consumers at the brand
level but is marginally behind Panasonic and Canon at per-product basis, which may be due its very long
product line.
Next, we look at which brands are more frequently searched together. The left hand panel in Figure
7.5 shows the joint search frequency between Sony and all other brands. The second bar indicates that
more than 80% of all consumers who search at least one Sony product also search at least one Panasonic
27 Our model also estimates a strong degree of heterogeneity in consumer valuation of product search and that the unobserved
component of utility which needs to be resolved through search is economically meaningful. That is, average consumers, value
one standard deviation of eij at approximately $203.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

1 2 3 4 5 6
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Brands
Search volume share (%)
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Brands
Average search volume share per product (%)
Figure 3: Search volume share by manufacturers and by products. The brands are 1 (Sony), 2 (Panasonic),
3 (Canon), 4 (JVC), 5 (Samsung), and 6 (Sanyo).
product. In the right hand panel of Figure 7.5, we show the joint search frequency between Canon and
all other products. We see that about 90% of Canon searchers also search at least one Sony or Panasonic
product. Note that the conditional search shares are asymmetric, i.e., 75% of Sony searchers also search for
a Canon, but 90% all of Canon searchers will also search for a Sony. Taken together, our results emphasize
that joint search frequencies among the top three brands are high while those with the rest of the brands
are low. This questions whether assuming full information across all the brands in consumer choice is
realistic .
Since our model is dened at the individual level, we can infer the joint search frequency among the
products in a more granular manner. With 91 products, there are 4,095 product pairs. We nd that 25% of
the product pairs is searched by less than 1% of the population, and an additional 65% is viewed by more
than 1% but less than 10%. Virtually all product pairs (98.5%) are predicted to be viewed by less than
20% of the population. We conclude from these numbers that the majority of products is not searched
jointly by a meaningful fraction of the population. This limited consumer search potentially has important
implications on demand estimation and on price competition. To investigate this further, we next look at
price elasticities.
7.6 Substitution and cross-elasticities
A price change aects consumer demand in two ways. First, it aects which brands enter the optimal
search sets of consumers. Second, the price change directly aects the consumer choice from the aected
optimal search set. We compute own- and cross-price elasticities to further understand the competition
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

1 2 3 4 5 6
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Brands
Fraction
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Brands
Fraction
Figure 4: Joint search share conditional on search on Sony (Left) and Canon (Right). The brands are 1
(Sony), 2 (Panasonic), 3 (Canon), 4 (JVC), 5 (Samsung), and 6 (Sanyo).
among the products. To do so, we rst predict the optimal search set for each individual i by computing
Vij and zij, and predict the demand for product j by counting the number of times j was the highest
utility product option in i's optimal search set. By doing this at dierent price levels, we can compute
arc-elasticities. The mean and median values for own price elasticities of the products in the empirical
analysis is -1.86 and -1.45, respectively.
We summarize the results using Figure 7.6 which visually shows the cross price elasticities of demand
for a given product (we use the product, labeled product 1, as an illustration). Recall that product 1
is a Sony camcorder, with DVD media format, 40 Г— optical zoom, 2.5-Inch swivel screen, etc., selling at
$360. Its own elasticity is -2.12. From the top gure, we observe that only 9 out of 90 products have
cross elasticities greater than 0.1, 55 products have cross elasticities smaller than 0.02, and 24 products
are computed to have cross price elasticities substantively equal to 0. From the top panel in the gure,
we conclude that products oered at similar price ranges are predicted to be overall more substitutable to
product 1 than the products oered at dierent price ranges. From the bottom panel, we observe that
the same media format products are predicted to be more substitutable to product 1. These two graphs
suggest that only a small number of products eectively compete with product 1 . We note that this is
true for the other products as well.
Table 7 shows, in detail, the closest and the most distant substitutes of product 1, as measured by
cross price elasticities. As previously mentioned, we see that the most elastic top ve products share the
same media format (DVD) and are in a similar price range. Note that among 14 Sony products based on
DVD, product 1 is oered at the lowest price, and most closely substitutable to product 1 are other
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Products ordered by increasing price
CrossвҲ’price elasticities
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Products ordered by format
CrossвҲ’price elasticities
price of product 1
Figure 5: Cross elasticities for product 1, sorted on price (top) and media formats (bottom) of competing
products.
similarly priced Sony products based on the same media format. Also, other similarly priced, but less
expensive options from dierent manufacturers are strong substitutes. At the bottom of the table, we show
that the four least cross elastic products do not share price levels or media formats with product 1. They
mostly have dierent brands, are based on dierent media formats, and are in dierent price brackets.
For completeness, we note that our model allows us to also compute an elasticity measure that captures
the impact of price on product search volume. For instance, a natural measure of the impact of price on
search would be the elasticity of search volume with respect to price as,
Пөsearch
j,k = %search frequency change in k
%price change for j (27)
Using this measure, we nd that product 1 has an own-search elasticity of вҲ’0.58. This means that, if we
increase the price of product 1 by 1%, its own search frequency will drop by 0.58%. The price increase of
product 1 results in a lower zij, providing an opportunity for its close competitors to enter the search set
at its expense. As is the case with demand, we observe that search for some products is not meaningfully
aected by price changes of product 1. About half of all products have cross search elasticities smaller
than 0.01 while only top 5 products have cross search elasticities greater than 0.05. This makes sense in
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

Product Demand Brand Media Zoom Price
ID Elasticity F ormat
1 -2.116 SONY DVD 40 В·В·В· $360
73 0.194 SONY DVD 12 В·В·В· $490
58 0.134 SAMSUNG DVD 34 В·В·В· $305
75 0.131 SONY DVD 12 В·В·В· $512
17 0.117 SONY DVD 25 В·В·В· $433
82 0.113 PANASONIC DVD 30 $337
55 0.105 SAMSUNG DVD 32 $294
42 0.101 CANON DVD 10 $362
...
...
... ...
...
...
...
35 0.000 JVC HD 10 В·В·В· $1404
23 0.000 PANASONIC MINIDV 12 В·В·В· $797
68 0.000 SAMSUNG FM 10 В·В·В· $340
6 0.000 SONY HD 10 В·В·В· $807
Table 7: Own and cross price elasticities of demand for product 1, a Sony Camcorder with DVD media
format, 40 Г— optical zoom, 2.5-Inch swivel screen, etc., selling at $360
our modeling framework since products that are not close substitutes of product 1 will have a very low
chance of entering the optimal search set together with product 1 even in the presence of product 1's price
increase.
Using our model and estimates, we nd that not all products are in direct competition with each other.
Our approach can be used to predict and identify the set of products of direct competition both in the
product search and in the product choice stages. Our approach predicts intuitive substitution patterns even
though we estimate the demand parameters using consumer search data only. As was pointed out earlier,
this is possible since we believe the view-rank data contain rich information about the consumer substitution
patterns, potentially more so than typical demand data. Given that the search data are becoming more
available to marketers (e.g., some publicly available data at Amazon.com and Walmart.com), our proposed
empirical model has the benet that we can investigate the substitution patterns in many other product
categories, which was heretofore often challenging due to lack of good data. Second, the model is exible
yet parsimonious. Finally, the random coecient discrete choice model is a special case of the proposed
model with zero search cost. With non-zero search cost in this model, the proposed model is capable of
representing a more realistic substitution patterns by eectively focusing on the products that are in direct
competition.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

8 Counterfactual simulations
8.1 The eect of reduced search costs on consumer surplus
Providing easy access, by means of product references, selectively lowers search costs for some products,
but not for all. The net eect of such easy product access is a priori not clear; on one hand, lowering
search cost may increase consumer surplus if it facilitates the nding of preferred products at a lower cost.
On the other hand, it may lower consumer surplus if search costs are lowered on the wrong products or if
lowered search costs result in disproportionately more search. To investigate these issues, we now analyze
how the frequency of the product reference or appearance aects the consumer surplus. We do so by
evaluating the eects of Amazon.com's product references on consumers' search set formation and their
subsequent choices. For this purpose, we simulate the optimal search sets and choices across population
with and without Amazon.com's product references. We then compute the aggregate change in the net
surplus across the population. The net surplus of a consumer with respect to a search set Si is dened as
the highest utility in the search set less the total search cost incurred in the formation of i's search set Si.
NS (Si) = max
jвҲҲSi
{uij}вҲ’
вҲ‘
jвҲҲSi
cij. (28)
The dierence between the net surplus with and without the Amazon.com's product references for the
entire population is computed as
вҲҶNS =
IвҲ‘
i=1
вҲҶNS,i (29)
=
IвҲ‘
i=1
NS (SвҲ—
i|L ={Lj})вҲ’NS (SвҲ—
i|L =вҲ…), (30)
where (SвҲ—
i|L) is i's optimal search set given L. The rst term computes the net surplus across consumers un-
der the presence of the Amazon.com's product references, while the second term computes the net benets
across consumers in a hypothetical case where Amazon.com does not provide such product references.
From this simulation study, we nd that virtually all consumers benet from the reduced search cost
through the product references oered at Amazon.com. The vast majority of consumers (99%) who benet
choose the same quality products but their total search costs are lower. Although the consumers generally
search more products in the presence of Amazon's product references, 28 their total search costs are lower
since per-product search cost is much lower under the presence of the product appearances. Among the
28 Without product appearances, the median and mean search set sizes are 7 and 9, respectively. With product appearances,
they are 11 and 14, respectively. This makes sense because lower search cost encourages consumers to conduct more search.
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

0 20 40 60 80 100
вҲ’60
вҲ’40
вҲ’20
0
20
Share difference(%)
0 20 40 60 80 100
0
10
20
30
40
50
Products
Frequency of product appearances
Figure 6: The impact of limited product search on market shares. The top panel shows the forecast of
market share under limited search less the share under full search. The bottom panel shows the frequency
of appearances for each product.
consumers who benet from these features, their total net surplus increases by less than 1%. However, we
nd that their total search costs decrease by 72% on average.
8.2 Market structure under full and limited search
The literature on information search has argued that limited information search can have a profound
impact on market structure (Nelson 1970, Anderson and Renault 1999). One such example is when popular
products are being recommended, thereby overstating their popularity at the expense of less popular and
less recommended products. We empirically investigate this topic by comparing the market shares under
two dierent scenarios: (1) the limited degree of search implied by the estimated search cost and (2) full
search implied by zero search costs. 29 Given the ever growing presence of variant forms of recommendations
at many online stores, this counterfactual exercise helps manufacturers understand the direct impact of
search costs on their product's performance.
The top panel in Figure 6 shows the percentage dierence in the market shares between the limited
and the full search scenarios. A positive number in this gure means that the share under the limited
(directed and sponsored) search is higher than that under the full search. The products on the horizontal
29 If we assume that a consumer conducts a complete search over the entire product space, our model reduces to a standard
probit model. By simulating, as before, a very large number of consumers using the estimated parameters but now with zero
search cost, we can compute market shares under the full search scenario.
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

axis are sorted by sales-rank with popular products on the left, and low selling products on the right. The
rst conclusion from the top graph is that, limited search on the Amazon.com website benets the better
selling items and harms the poorer selling items. The bottom graph shows that the store-level frequency
of appearances is generally larger for better selling products. Combining the top and bottom panels in this
gure, we further see that the percentage share dierence is greater for the products that appear less at
the online store. Indeed, references to competing products form a double jeopardy to lower value products.
Namely, not only do these products suer from low preferences, they additionally suer from high search
cost (in the sense of having none or smaller number of store-level appearances).
We nd that the online market for camcorders is more concentrated with than without a mechanism
that selectively lowers the search costs. Figure 6 illustrates, in general, shares of popular brands increase
with positive search cost, and decrease with zero-search cost. On the other hand, the demand for many
lower selling camcorders would increase as much as 30% if search cost were absent. In this sense, non-zero
search cost tends to concentrate the online market for camcorders into demand for popular items. We note
that this polarization eect of recommendation based on past popularity may be larger once we simulate
over multiple time periods and allow the recommendation eect to accumulate and settle in. We intend to
take this up in future research.
9 Discussion and conclusion
We study online consumer search and choice behavior in a durable goods context. Because evaluating
a product for purchase takes time and eort, a consumer who seeks to maximize expected utility minus
total search cost, needs to decide which product to search rst, second, etc., and when to stop search.
We have proposed a model of optimal search and choice for the analysis of online demand and consumer
surplus in the case of durable search goods. Our model can estimate demand primitives for heterogeneous
households, as well as a distribution of household specic search cost and its dependence on product
references or appearances..
Our modeling framework has a number of important benets. First, it constitutes an internally consis-
tent theory of information search and demand, integrated into a random utility choice framework. Second,
the model has closed form expressions for the probability that a given brand is included in the search set.
It also has closed form expressions for the probability distribution of entire search sets or consideration
sets. Third, the model is not subject to the curse of dimensionality. At the market level, the model
allows for the occurrence of all possible search sets, whereas, at the individual level, only as many search
sets can be optimal as there are products to choose from. Fourth, the model is uniquely suited for the
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

analysis of demand systems from widely available product search data, click-trail data, viewing frequencies,
coincidence of pairs of brands being viewed in the same session, or observed consideration sets. Lastly,
our empirical model is applicable to other search contexts than shopping for durable goods, such as the
analysis of click-stream data.
We show with data experiments that the model is identied and that the estimation strategy works
well. From these data experiments, we conclude that it is possible to estimate demand systems with
heterogeneity from product viewing data, which are freely available for many consumer durable products.
From an application of the model to the online market for camcorders at Amazon.com, we nd that
consumers do not search many products. This means that the majority of product pairs are never searched
or considered together in an online choice setting. Consistently, we also nd that the cross price elasticities
of vast majority of product pairs are substantively 0. Finally, we nd that vast majority of consumers are
better o with tools that selectively reduce search costs , and that they tend to concentrate demand into
popular products.
We see three areas of further development of our model. First, the current model uses only the view-
rank data. Amazon.com also provides sales-rank data. 30 Recently, Bajari and Fox (2007) show how these
data can be used in demand estimation. We hope that the combination of both types of data may lead to
further improvements in model estimation. For instance, we believe that it is possible to estimate aspects
of the uncertainty that is associated with a particular product, i.e., to estimate Пғij or factorizations thereof.
This is because dierent Пғij will shift the view-ranks of products (see Equation 23), but should not impact
the sales-rank (see also Bajari and Fox 2007). Thus, where as view-rank data allow for the identication of
the random eects choice based demand system, the combination of view and sales-rank data, may provide
us with an opportunity to estimate some aspects of product uncertainty.
A second but related avenue for further development is to assume only partial consumer knowledge of
attribute information and study how this aects choice and search outcomes. 31 That is, in our model, the
goal of search would remain to resolve the unknown component of utility eij, but we could allow that this
component involves part of the product attributes. We also see an application of our model in research on
the eects of advertising, e.g. in lowering search cost and aecting consideration.
A nal avenue for future research is to analyze the long run implication of recommendations of popular
products for industry concentration and the demand for new products. That is, if purchases are inuenced
by recommendation, future recommendations will depend on current recommendations, in addition to
current demand.
30 Note that we currently use the sales rank data for validation purpose.
31 Note that we currently test the robustness of our empirical model under dierent assumptions of partial consumer
knowledge.
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

A Derivation of the reservation utilities
The reservation utilities zij can be expressed rewriting the implicit equation 6 into
cij =
вҲ« вҲһ
zij
(uijвҲ’zij)f (uij)duij = (1вҲ’F (zij))
[вҲ« вҲһ
zij
(uijвҲ’zij) f (uij)
1вҲ’F (zij)duij
]
, (31)
with F (zij) equal to the cumulative probability distribution of uij evaluated at zij. The term in parenthesis
after the second equality sign is the probability that, upon search, uij exceeds zij, whereas the term in
square brackets is the expected value of the truncated distribution of uijвҲ’zij given that uij larger than
zij. Using the assumption of normality uijвҲјN (Vij,Пғij) and substituting the expectation of a truncated
normal distribution (e.g., Johnson and Kotz 1970) in equation 31, we obtain,
cij = (1вҲ’ ОҰ (О¶ij))
(
VijвҲ’zij +Пғij
ПҶ (О¶ij)
1вҲ’ ОҰ (О¶ij)
)
,
with ПҶ and ОҰ the standard Normal density and CDF, and О¶ij = zijвҲ’Vij
Пғij
. Dividing both sides of the last
equation by Пғij, we need to solve zij out of the equation,
xij = (1вҲ’ ОҰ (О¶ij))
( ПҶ (О¶ij)
1вҲ’ ОҰ (О¶ij)вҲ’О¶ij
)
,
where xij = cij
Пғij
. Finally, write the standard normal hazard rate ПҶ(О¶ij)
1вҲ’ОҰ(О¶ij) by О» (О¶ij). It is noted that this
hazard rate is the inverse of Mills' Ratio (Johnson and Kotz 1970). Dropping subscripts because this
equation holds for any i and j, we obtain the following implicit equation.
x = (1вҲ’ ОҰ (О¶)) (О» (О¶)вҲ’О¶). (32)
This equation is identical to equation (24) in the main text. Note that if we know О¶, we can compute
z =V +О¶Г—Пғ from the denition of О¶ = zвҲ’V
Пғ , above.
There are a number of properties of this equation that deserve further mentioning. First, and impor-
tantly, we propose to solve О¶ out of equation (32), which expresses a function between two variables x and
О¶, not directly involving any model parameters.
Second, from Barrow and Cohen (1954), we use that the derivative of the hazard rate (the inverse
of Mills' Ratio) can be implicitly expressed as, О»вҖІ (О¶) = О» (О¶) (О» (О¶)вҲ’О¶). Using this result and taking
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

derivatives on both sides of 32 with respect to О¶, we obtain that
вҲӮx
вҲӮО¶ =вҲ’ (1вҲ’ ОҰ (О¶)). (33)
Thus the derivative of x with respect to О¶ is negative. 32 Thus, x is a decreasing function of О¶. This implies
also that О¶ is a decreasing function of x. From monotonicity, solutions to equation (32) yields unique pairs
of x and О¶. 33
Third, from results on Mills' ratio, О» (О¶)вҲ’О¶ >0 and limО¶вҶ’вҲһО» (О¶) = О¶. Therefore, as one expects, x,
the normalized cost of search (cost , c, divided by product uncertainty, Пғ), is always positive. Also, one
obvious solution to this equation is x = 0 and О¶ = inf. Indeed, at 0 cost, the attractiveness to search an
item is determined by the maximum upside of product utility which is + inf.
The results above justify that we can construct a table of combinations of x and О¶ that solve this
equation. This table does not depend on model parameters, and therefore it can be solved once and it
can subsequently be used in estimation, possibly with an interpolation step. Namely, at any stage in the
estimation, we can use the current value for Пғij and cij to compute xij = cij
Пғij
. Given xij, we can look up
О¶ (xij) that solves equation 32 and compute zij from the denition of zвҲ—
ij and the current values for Vij and
Пғij, i.e.,
zij =Vij +О¶
(cij
Пғij
)
Г—Пғij (34)
With reference to equation (23) in the text, in this appendix we have shown that zij can be decomposed
into the expected utility Vij and xed function of normalized search cost cij
Пғij
, which translates how product
uncertainty is valued in search. The computational steps involved are trivial and inexpensive. The table
of x and О¶ can be solved fast for an arbitrarily ne grid on x. As this table is constructed outside the
estimation, the marginal impact of extra precision in computing the z's on estimation time is 0.
32 Using
x = (1вҲ’ ОҰ (О¶)) (О» (О¶)вҲ’О¶)
and dierentiating with respect to О¶, we get
xвҖІ =вҲ’ОҰвҖІ (О¶) (О» (О¶)вҲ’О¶) + (1вҲ’ ОҰ (О¶)) (О» (О¶) (О» (О¶)вҲ’О¶)вҲ’ 1).
The second term on the right hand side is
ОҰвҖІ (О¶) (О» (О¶)вҲ’О¶)вҲ’ (1вҲ’ ОҰ (О¶)),
which follows from the denition of the hazard rate, i.e.,
О» (О¶) = ОҰвҖІ (О¶)
(1вҲ’ ОҰ (О¶)).
33 Also see the appendix (page 651) of Weitzman (1979) for a more general way to prove the existence and uniqueness of
the reservation utility.
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

References
[1] Albuquerque, Paulo and Bart J. Bronnenberg (2008),Measuring Consumer Heterogeneity using Ag-
gregated Data: An Application to the Frozen Pizza Industry, Marketing Science , 28:2, 356-372.
[2] Anderson, Simon P., and RГ©gis Renault (1999), Pricing, Product Diversity, and Search Costs: A
Bertrand-Chamberlin-Diamond Model, The RAND Journal of Economics , 30 (4), 719-35.
[3] Bajari, Patrick and Jeremy Fox (2007), Measuring the Eciency of an FCC Spectrum Auction,
University of Chicago, working paper.
[4] Bajari, Patrick., Jeremy Fox, and Stephen P. Ryan (2007), Linear Regression Estimation of Discrete
Choice Models with Nonparametric Random Coecients, American Economic Review , 97 (2), 459-63.
[5] Barrow D. F., and A.C. Cohen (1954), On Some Functions Involving Mill's Ratio, The Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, 25 (2), 405-08.
[6] Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes (2004), Dierentiated Products Demand Systems
from a Combination of Micro and Macro Data: The New Car Market, Journal of Political Economy ,
112 (1), 68-105.
[7] Boatwright, Peter, Robert McCulloch, and Peter Rossi (1999), Account-Level Modeling for Trade
Promotion: An Application of a Constrained Parameter Hierarchical Model, Journal of the American
Statistical Association , 94, 1063-73.
[8] Bresnahan, Timothy F. (1989), Competition and Collusion in the American Automobile Industry:
The 1955 Price War, The Journal of Industrial Economics , 35 (4), 457-82.
[9] Bruno, Hernan, A., and Naufel Vilcassim (2008), Structural Demand Estimation with Varying Prod-
uct A vailability, Marketing Science, 1126-31.
[10] Chiang, Jeongwen, Siddhartha Chib and Chakravarthi Narasimhan (1999), "Markov Chain Monte
Carlo and Models of Consideration Set and Parameter Heterogeneity," Journal of Econometrics , 89,
223-48.
[11] ComScore, Inc. (July 30, 2007),  Retail E-Commerce Climbs 23 Percent in Q2 Versus Year Ago ,
Press release.
[12] Diamond, Peter A., (1971), A Model of Price Adjustment, Journal of Economic Theory , 3 (2),
158-68.
[13] Efron, Bradley. Tibshirani, Robert J. (1993), An introduction to bootstrap, Chapman & Hall. New
York. NY.
[14] Goeree, Michelle (2008), Limited Information and Advertising in the US Personal Computer Industry,
Econometrica , 76 (5), 1017-74.
[15] Gowrisankaran, Gautam, and Marc Rysman (2007), Dynamics of Consumer Demand for New Durable
Goods, Washington University in St. Louis , working paper.
[16] Gilbride, Timothy J. and Greg M. Allenby (2004) , A Choice Model with Conjunctive, Disjunctive,
and Compensatory Screening Rules, Marketing Science , 23 (3), 391-406.
[17] Hauser, John R., and Birger Wernerfelt (1990), An Evaluation Cost Model of Consideration Sets,
The Journal of Consumer Research , 16 (4), 393-408.
[18] Hong, Han and Matthew Shum (2006), Using price distributions to estimate search cost, The RAND
Journal of Economics, 37(2), 257-75.
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

[19] Horsky, Dan, and Paul Nelson (2006), Testing the Statistical Signicance of Linear Programming
Estimators, Management Science , 52(1), 128-35.
[20] HortaГ§su, Ali., and Chad Syverson (2004), Product Dierentiation, Search Costs, and Competition in
the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds, Quarterly Journal of Economics ,
119 (2), 403-56.
[21] Howard J. A., and J. N. Sheth (1969), The theory of buyer behavior, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York, NY.
[22] Huang, Jen-Hung and Yi-Fen Chen (2006), Herding in online product choice, Psychology and Mar-
keting, 23(5), 413-28.
[23] Johnson, N. L., and S. Kotz (1970), Distributions in statistics: continuous univariate distributions,
1, Wiley, New York.
[24] Jupiter Media Metrix, Inc.,  From Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2004 .
[25] Linden, Greg D., Brent R. Smith and Nida K. Zada (2005), Use of Product Viewing Histories of Users
to Identify Related Products, US Patent Number: 6,912,505 B2 .
[26] McCall, John J. (1965),The Economics of Information and Optimal Stopping Rules, The Journal of
Business , 38 (3), 300-17.
[27] Mehta N., Rajiv S. and Kannan Srinivasan (2003), Price Uncertainty and Consumer Search: A
Structural Model of Consideration Set Formation, Marketing Science , 22(1), 2003, 58-84
[28] Meijer, E., and Rouwendal, J. (2006), Measuring welfare eects in models with random coecients,
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21, 22744.
[29] Moe, Wendy (2003), Buying, Searching, or Browsing: Dierentiating Between Online Shoppers Using
In-store Navigational Clickstream, Journal of Consumer Psychology , 13 (1 & 2), 29-39.
[30] Montgomery Alan, Shibo. Li, Kannan Srinivasan, and John.C. Liechty (2004), Modeling Online
Browsing and Path Analysis Using Clickstream Data, Marketing Science , 23 (4), 579
[31] Moorthy, Sridhar, Ratchford Brian T., and Debabrata Talukdar (1997), Consumer Information Search
Revisited: Theory and Empirical Analysis, Journal of Consumer Research, 23 (4) , 263-77.
[32] Moraga-GonzГЎles, JosГ©, Louis, (2006), Estimation of Search Cost, University of Groningen, working
paper.
[33] Nelson, Philip (1970), Information and Consumer Behavior, The Journal of Political Economy , 78
(2), 311-29.
[34] Nelson, Philip (1974), Advertising as Information, The Journal of Political Economy , 82 (4), 729-54.
[35] Petrin, Amil. (2002), Quantifying the Benets of New Products: The Case of the Minivan, Journal
of Political Economy, 110 (4), 705-29
[36] Reinganum, J. (1982), Strategic Search Theory, International Economic Review , 23, 1-15.
[37] Reinganum, J. (1983), Nash Equilibrium Search for the Best Alternative, The Journal of Economic
Theory , 30, 139-152
[38] Roberts, John H., and James M. Lattin (1991), Development and Testing of a Model of Consideration
Set Composition, Journal of Marketing Research , 28 (4), 429-40.
[39] Sonnier, G., Andrew Ainslie, and Thomas Otter (2007), Heterogeneity distributions of willingness to
pay in choice models, Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 5(3), 31331.
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267

===PAGE BREAK===

[40] Senecal, Sylvain and Jacques Nantel (2004), The inuence of online product recommendations on
consumers' online choices, Journal of Retailing, 80 (2), 159-69.
[41] Stigler, George J. (1961), The Economics of Information, The Journal of Political Economy , 69 (3),
213-25.
[42] Weitzman, Martin L (1979), Optimal Search for the Best Alternative, Econometrica , 47 (3), 641-54
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1340267