sustainability
Article
Identifying Service Opportunities Based on Outcome-Driven
Innovation Framework and Deep Learning: A Case Study
of Hotel Service
Sunghyun Nam 1, Sejun Yoon 2
 , Nagarajan Raghavan 3
 and Hyunseok Park 2,*
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Nam, S.; Yoon, S.;
Raghavan, N.; Park, H. Identifying
Service Opportunities Based on
Outcome-Driven Innovation
Framework and Deep Learning: A
Case Study of Hotel Service.
Sustainability 2021, 13, 391.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su13010391
Received: 20 November 2020
Accepted: 30 December 2020
Published: 4 January 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neu-
tral with regard to jurisdictional clai-
ms in published maps and institutio-
nal afﬁliations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors. Li-
censee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and con-
ditions of the Creative Commons At-
tribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1 Samsung Research, Seoul 04763, Korea; shyun.nam@samsung.com
2 Department of Information Systems, Hanyang University, Seoul 04763, Korea; yoonsejun@hanyang.ac.kr
3 Engineering Product Development Pillar, Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD),
Singapore 487372, Singapore; nagarajan@sutd.edu.sg
* Correspondence: hp@hanyang.ac.kr; Tel.: +82-2-2220-2396
Abstract: This research proposes a data-driven systematic method to discover service opportunities
in a speciﬁc service sector. Speciﬁcally, the method quantitatively identiﬁes the important but
unsatisﬁed customer needs by analyzing online review data. To represent customer needs in a
structured form, the job-to-be-done-based customer outcomes are adopted from the outcome-driven
innovation (ODI) framework. Therefore, job-to-be-done information is extracted from the review data
and is transformed into customer outcomes. The outcomes having high service opportunities are
selected by metrics for quantifying the importance and satisfaction score of the outcomes. This paper
conducted an empirical study for hotel service using relevant review data. The results show that the
method can identify customer needs in hotel service—e.g., maximizing safety to pay price/deposit,
and maximizing possibility to avoid waiting at lobby—and objectively prioritize strategic directions
for service innovation. Therefore, the proposed method can be used as an intelligent tool for the
effective development of a business strategy.
Keywords: customer needs identiﬁcation; job-to-be-done; service job map; subject-action-object (SAO);
natural language processing (NLP); bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT);
attention network
1. Introduction
New business development is an essential task for sustainable growth in markets [1–3].
Even though customer needs are explicit directions for business development, identifying
important but unmet needs is basically a difﬁcult task [4,5]. In fact, even many successful
companies often fail to ﬁnd what their customers really want. To help the task, there
has been much effort on a systematic approach to customer needs identiﬁcation [ 6,7].
Outcome-driven innovation (ODI) as a job-to-be-done-based analytic framework to identify
customer hidden needs [8] is one representative approach. ODI represents customer needs
as what outcomes customers want to achieve from job-to-be-done, i.e., desired outcomes [9].
Job-to-be-done is generally deﬁned as the fundamental purposes or problems that customers
want to solve by products or services [ 9,10] and outcomes as a measure of how well the
job-to-be-done are achieved [9]. In particular, since ODI decomposes the whole operational
process of each job-to-be-done into multiple universal steps by using a Universal job map [5],
ODI increases the chances to discover hidden service opportunities.
Regardless of the theoretical and methodological excellences, ODI has critical draw-
backs. Since the diversity and robustness of a set of the deﬁned outcomes directly affect the
quality and reliability of analytic results, deﬁning appropriate job-to-be-done and outcomes is
the crucial task in an ODI-based approach [9]. ODI is basically an expert knowledge-based
approach, but it is fundamentally difﬁcult to deﬁne the complete set of job-to-be-done and
outcomes by domain experts’ subjective knowledge in the recent complex and converging
Sustainability 2021, 13, 391. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13010391 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 2 of 25
market environment. In addition, ODI determines some of the outcomes as service opportu-
nities by customer interviews, but it is a very time-consuming and expensive approach.
To overcome the limitations, this paper proposes an ODI-based quantitative method to
identify customer needs in a speciﬁc service sector using deep learning techniques. Instead
of customer interviews, the method utilizes online review data. Speciﬁcally, each customer
review is tokenized into sentences, and each sentence is mapped onto one of the steps
in Service job map by a multiclass text classiﬁcation using BERT (bidirectional encoder
representations from transformers) [11]. Job-to-be-done information represented as subject-
action-object (SAO) is extracted by a syntactic analysis using a natural language processing
(NLP) toolkit, such as Stanford CoreNLP [12] or spaCy [13]. Job-to-be-done is transformed
into relevant outcomes by identifying the relevant measures using BERT-based semantic
similarity and combining them to each job-to-be-done. Outcomes identiﬁed in the same step
in a Service job map are clustered by using the pre-trained BERT-based semantic sentence
similarities, and one representative outcome for each cluster is deﬁned. The important, but
unmet outcomes, i.e., customer needs, are identiﬁed based on the metrics for quantifying
the importance and satisfaction of outcomes. As the ﬁrst attempt to develop a data-driven
ODI approach for service sectors, the proposed method has clear contributions. First, this
research adopted Service job map, instead of Universal job map, to cover more complex service
processes. Second, the performance of classifying job-to-be-done into one of Service job map
steps is improved by using a BERT-based attention network. Third, the outcome statements
are automatically generated from the review data. Lastly, the method can assess potential
opportunities for the outcomes without any expensive interview process.
To test the proposed method, this paper conducted an empirical study on hotel service
using the relevant online customer review data. The results show that the proposed
method can discover customer needs, which are difﬁcult to be identiﬁed by conventional
approaches, and evaluate the service opportunity of customer needs in an objective manner.
Since the result clearly prioritizes strategic directions, the proposed method can be an
intelligent tool for service innovation.
2. Theoretical Background
2.1. Outcome-Driven Innovation
Customers buy products or services to get their jobs done [14]. When people buy a
quarter-inch drill, what they really want is not a drill, but a quarter-inch hole [5]. In addition,
unlike products or services, ajob-to-be-done not only has no solution boundary but also is
stable over time. In the music industry, for example, many products and services from tape
players, compact disc players, MP3 players to streaming services have been developed and
delivered over time, but their mainjob-to-be-done “listen to music” has not been changed.
Therefore, job-to-be-done theory has been widely recognized as a framework for categorizing,
defining, capturing, and organizing all customer needs [9,10,15], and new product/service
development should start with identifying their customers’ fundamental jobs.
ODI is a systematic process to discover hidden segments of opportunities by analyzing
from the customer’sjob-to-be-done perspective [9]. ODI basically focuses on what customers
are trying to execute, i.e., job when they are using a product or service and what measures
of performance, i.e., outcome, customers use to evaluate the success during or after they
execute it. Figure 1 shows an example of a job-to-be-done and outcome. The basic format
of a job-to-be-done is verb-object + context, and the format of outcome is direction + metric
+ object of control, i.e., verb-object + context. In particular, since the structure of outcome
allows only two directions, maximize or minimize, with measurable metrics, interviewees
can give accurate scores without ambiguity.

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 3 of 25
Figure 1. Example of job-to-be-done and outcome. Note: In the medical service process, if a patient, i.e.,
customer, is ill and visit the hospital, the reason why the patient gives personal information, sees a
doctor, and describes symptoms is to get a prescription ﬁlled so that the patient can get take proper
medicine and gets better. Therefore, the job-to-be-done that the customer is trying to achieve is to get
a prescription ﬁlled. After having the prescription ﬁlled, the customer would evaluate the entire
experience beginning from visiting the hospital to leaving the hospital. If the customer thinks that
the time it takes to see a doctor is important and the time needs to be shortened, the outcome that
the customer wants from the medical service is to minimize the time it takes to see a doctor. If the
hospital wants to innovate their services for increasing customer values, reducing the time it takes to
see a doctor would be a good strategic direction.
The strength of ODI as an analytic framework comes from the decomposition of ajob’s
operational process. Although most job-to-be-done-based approaches only focus on a job’s
execution, there exist many cases that critical service opportunities were identiﬁed prior to
or after the execution step. Apple’s iTunes can be a good example. This successful service is
more focused on the convenience in music preparation and organization than the execution
of the job-to-be-done “listen to music”. For this, ODI suggested Service job map (Figure 2) [16].
Service job map can effectively visualize and overall operational process of a speciﬁc job, and
so it is a basic framework that enables ODI to discover desired outcomes from unexpected
steps. Service job map consists of 12 steps and can fully consider the characteristic that
service begins with deﬁning service needs and accessing to service providers and ends with
payment. Therefore, Service job map well represents service processes with great speciﬁcity.
Since Service job map is designed for service innovation, it seems to be similar to a service
blueprint. In fact, Service job map and service blueprint are basically similar in terms of
the visualizing framework for a service process. However, the clear difference between
them is the job’s perspective. The goal ofService job map is not to capture signiﬁcant service
encounters but to represent what a customer must accomplish to obtain the service [16].
After deﬁning Jobs-to-be-done for a speciﬁc service, how customers use the service from
the job-to-be-done and outcome perspectives should be identiﬁed based on the Service job map
framework. Each step describes what customers want to achieve; not what customers are
doing. Domain experts usually deﬁne all jobs and outcomes based on their knowledge and
insight. However, considering that some of the deﬁned outcomes are selected as service
opportunities, it seems to be risky to rely solely on experts’ subjective insight for job
and outcome deﬁnitions. If they look over some critical outcomes, some valuable service
opportunities can never be discovered by ODI. In addition, ODI requires a large number of
interviews, 100+ interviews for usual cases and 200+ for complex markets [9], and it costs
many expenses and times. Therefore, this paper adopted Service job map as the analytic
framework and mapped job-to-be-done extracted from review data on each step of theService
job map.

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 4 of 25
There exist several attempts to apply the ODI process in other ﬁelds. Lim et al. [17]
proposed a semi-automatic method to construct a simple Universal job map for a speciﬁc
product from patent data. By analyzing patent documents based on ODI’s job classiﬁcation,
job-to-be-done were identiﬁed. However, since this research focuses on product opportu-
nities using patent data, the analytic process structure and data are basically different
from service-related research. Joung et al. [18] applied ODI to detect customer complaints
in end-user products. This research extracts keywords and functional information from
webpages and classifying them into Universal job map steps using semantic similarity anal-
ysis. Based on the clustered information in each step, ODI experts deﬁne the complaints
of the product. Even though these studies tried to develop a data-driven ODI approach,
the research purpose, method structure and data are fundamentally different from the
proposed method and insufﬁcient to apply to identify service opportunities.
Figure 2. Service job map, redrawn from Bettencourt [16].
2.2. Multi-Class Sentence Classiﬁcation Using BERT
There have been many NLP approaches to classify a sentence into one of the deﬁned
classes. To run a machine-learning algorithm for NLP , textual information is usually
converted to numerical feature vectors using representation models. Even though early
representation models, such as a term frequency-based one-hot vector space, are simple
and fast, they are basically difﬁcult to reﬂect semantic similarities between sentences [19,20].
Deep learning techniques have been recently recognized to be a breakthrough for text
classiﬁcation and other NLP tasks. The powerful improvement neural networks made is
incorporating context information.
Recurrent neural network (RNN) as the representative deep learning algorithm for
NLP encodes information given until time step t-1 into hidden internal state and computes
it with new information given at time stept [21]. This incorporation of previous information
enables RNN to conduct more sophisticated text classiﬁcations by considering semantic
relationships. However, RNN inherently suffers from exploding or vanishing gradient
problem [22]. Tokens must be transformed into a vector in order to be fed into a neural
network. GloVe [23], Word2Vec [19] and FastText [24] are a pre-trained word embedding
model that converts a token into a vector. Neural networks understand the meaning of
a sentence by calculating the vectors in a variety of ways. Vanishing gradient problem
occurs if the information on early tokens is diluted when the last token is calculated. If a
sentence has n tokens, the ﬁrst token’s vector is multiplied with the same matrix at least
n times. If the matrix has an element less than 1, which is what most matrixes are, the
ﬁnal value would be so small that the gradient vanishes. If the gradient is too small, the
neural network becomes untrainable since feedforward neural networks such as RNN are

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 5 of 25
trained by a backpropagation algorithm [ 25]. The longer the sentence is, the bigger the
problem of vanishing gradient is. The attention network is a network that is free from
the vanishing gradient problem. It can incorporate context information efﬁciently since it
allows modeling of dependencies without regard to their distance in the input or output
sequences [26]. Using an attention network, neural networks can process complex semantic
information. More recently, BERT, the pre-trained language model, was suggested based
on the self-attention mechanism used for attention networks [11]. BERT trains a universal
language model from the massive corpus and so can be utilized for many NLP tasks by
ﬁne-tuning. In particular, since BERT has achieved great performances in sentence-level
NLP tasks, it is suitable for our purpose for sentence classiﬁcations.
Therefore, this paper classiﬁes each review sentence to one of the steps in a Service job
map by attention network-based multiclass sentence classiﬁcations using BERT.
3. Method
The overall procedure for the proposed method consists of six steps:
1. Collection of online review data;
2. Sentence tokenization and cleansing using NLTK (natural language toolkit);
3. Sentence classiﬁcation to one of Service job map steps using BERT-based multiclass
sentence classiﬁcation;
4. Job-to-be-done extraction by using a syntactic analysis;
5. Transformingjobs-to-be-doneto customeroutcomesusing BERT-based semantic similarities;
6. Service opportunity discovery based on importance and satisfaction of outcomes.
3.1. Collection of Online Review Data
As the ﬁrst step, customer online review data for a speciﬁc service is collected from
websites, such as Trustpilot, Trip Advisor or Yelp. Web scraping is usually used to extract
web data, such as title, review, date, rating, and user identity. To gather review data related
to a speciﬁc service, a search query or category should be deﬁned.
3.2. Data Preprocessing
Review data needs to be reﬁned for better textual analysis. Each review usually
consists of multiple sentences, and they should be transformed into a line-sentence using
a sentence-tokenization in NLTK. Then, stop words should be eliminated. Unlike usual
text analysis, since customer behaviors are important information for this research, and so
subjects related to people should be considered. To preserve information related to people,
we excluded terms related to people, such as “I” or “them”, from the stop word list.
3.3. Sentence Classiﬁcation to Service Job Map
Multilabel classiﬁcations commonly perform the problem transformation where mul-
tilabel problems were transformed into one or more single-label problems, such as a
multiclass classiﬁcation [ 27]. Binary relevance (BR) is the most common method when
problem transformation is performed [28]. BR changes a multilabel problem into a series
of binary problems that each binary problem predicts the relevance of one of the labels.
When the dependency between labels is weak, BR can achieve higher quality [ 29]. BR
neural network is not a popular method since each isolated binary network needs training
while ignoring dependencies between labels [30]. When samples are assigned to a single
label, the problem is called multiclass classiﬁcation. In such a case, BR is not a good
method to classify samples because BR can assign multiple labels at the same time. In the
multiclass classiﬁcation problem, the one-vs-all method is widely used [ 31]. The one-vs-all
method makes the binary decision whether a sample belongs to one class or the others. By
calculating the probability for all classes, the class with the highest probability is selected.
In this way, only one class is assigned to a sample.
In the domain of neural networks, multiclass text classiﬁcation can be divided into
the two types: threshold-dependent neural network (TDNN) or binary relevance neural

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 6 of 25
network (BRNN) method using the BR method. TDNN trains every activation function
at once, while RBNN trains one function at a time. It is known that the more labels are
independent, the better quality BRNN can make. Based on the ODI theory, we considered
that each step in Service job map is independent enough.
We also assumed that adding additional semantic descriptions on what customers
must achieve at each step will help neural networks for better performance. Every step in
Service job map is described with a short sentence (Figure 2). Then this short sentence was
given to BERT as a piece of semantic information. BERT is trained to calculate the semantic
similarity between a review sentence and the semantic descriptions (Figure 3). Among
given semantic descriptions, one having the highest semantic similarity with the focal
review sentence can represent the review sentence, and, therefore, the review sentence is
assigned to the Service job map step related to the semantic description. From here, we call
this approach as semantic similarity-binary relevance (SS–BR) method.
Figure 3. Binary relevance text classiﬁcation using bidirectional encoder representations
from transformers (BERT).
3.4. Extraction of Job-To-Be-Done
3.4.1. Parsing Sentences into Clauses
Job-to-be-done is a function from the customer’s perspective [5,14], and so it is basically
the same format or expression with a general functionality. Function information in
texts is usually expressed by verb-object (VO) [ 32] or subject-action-object (SAO) [ 33].
SAO structure as an extended expression for function information represents a clear
relationship between subject and functional action [ 34]. In particular, since subjects for
function information having the meaning of job-to-be-done for customers are basically
customers, i.e., people, it is better to extract SAO structures.
To extract SAO structures from a sentence, a syntactic analysis should be conducted.
However, it is usually difﬁcult to extract SAO structures from a complex sentence. Hence, a
complex sentence needs to be decomposed into simple clauses for better extractions. Eight
syntactic dependencies were used to describe core clausal relations (Table 1), andmarkers
like the word introducing a ﬁnite clause subordinate to anther clause is a dependent of
the subordinate clause head. However, every clause does not start with a marker that ﬁts
our needs. For example, in the sentence “I tried to ﬁnish it”, “to” is a maker and “ﬁnish
it” is a clause. However, “ﬁnish it” does not contain any meaningful customer actions.
Based on qualitative investigating a number of different types of reviews, we found that
clauses linked by conjunction and that-clause are the two clauses having no exception. The
dependency tag marker and conjunction are the two types we used for this research. For
example, if token “that” has marker dependency, which links a clause, tokens that come
after “that” tokens consist of a clause or multiple clauses. However, not all “that” token has

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 7 of 25
marker dependency. When “that” is used as demonstrative pronouns, such as in “I want
that toy”, it will have determiner dependency.
Table 1. Core syntactic dependencies for clausal predicates.
Tag Description
nsubj Syntactic subject of a clause
nsubjpass Syntactic subject of a passive clause
dobj Object of the verb phrase
iobj Indirect object of a verb phrase
csubj Clausal subject of a clause
csubjpass Clausal subject of a passive clause
ccomp Clausal complement of a verb or adjective
xcomp Open clausal complement of a verb or adjective
Sentences with conjunction also introduce additional clauses (Figure 4). When con-
junctions are found in sentences, every possible SAO structure should be extracted. Con-
junctions can be placed between sentences, clauses, noun phrases and verbs. A noun
phrase is a phrase with a noun token as its head and adnominal tokens.
Figure 4. Parsing sentences with conjunction into clauses.
When conjunctions are placed between sentences and clauses, it can identify by using
the same method. When conjunctions are placed between sentences or clauses, the token
that comes after the conjunction is a noun phrase, and it has a parent token whose Part-
of-speech (POS) is a verb. In such a case, the latter sentence or clause is detached with a
conjunction. If a conjunction is attached to the former sentence or clause, it makes them an
incomplete sentence, which could make the further analysis more complex. It is relatively
easy to identify conjunctions between nouns. The sentence, such as “I asked for early
check-in and extra roll-away,” is the case where a conjunction is placed between nouns.
Suppose tokens that come before a conjunction are only nouns. If adnominal tokens and
noun tokens that come after a conjunction and before a verb share the same verb, then the
conjunction is introducing additional subjects. In such a case, the sentence is not parsed, and
subjects are extracted as the subject in SAO structure as a whole, including conjunctions.
When conjunctions are placed between verbs, tokens that appear before and after
conjunction have the possibility to be independent clauses. A sentence such as “He smiled
and walked away” is the case. When conjunctions are placed between verbs, verbs that
appear after the conjunction has thexcomp dependency and share the samensubj or nsubjpass
token in the previous clause as its child token. In such a case, the sentence is not parsed,
and verbs are extracted as the action in SAO structure as a whole, including conjunctions.
Dependency tag punct—punctuation, such as comma—can work the same way as
the conjunction works. It can be placed between sentences, clauses, noun chunks and
verb chunks and share the same clause-parsing method with the conjunction. One unique
characteristic of punct is that it can insert a clause or phrase in a sentence. A sentence such
as “Mike, the defending champion, lost the race” or “Mike tried hard, but even he tried, he

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 8 of 25
lost the race” is the case. The former case has phrases between punctuations, and the latter
case has clauses between punctuations. In both cases, tokens that lie between punctuations
are extracted and treated as an independent clause. SAO structures are extracted from the
clause. The extracted phrase itself does not contain any customer actions because it has no
verb in it. Therefore, the extracted phrases are deleted.
3.4.2. Separating Phrases in SAO Structure
Pseudocode for extracting subject phrase, verb phrase and object phrase is as shown
in Figure 5. A sentence that starts with a conjunction should be considered to extract
noun phrases. In the previous issue, one sentence that multiple sentences are connected
by conjunctions is parsed into independent sentences. In such a case, the latter sentence
may share the same subject as the former sentence and hence, the subject token is missing.
To solve this problem, we assumed the clause shares the same subject with the previous
clause when the sentence starts with a conjunction, and the subject is missing.
Figure 5. Pseudocode for extracting subject-action-object (SAO) structures from clause.
3.4.3. Filtering Out Irrelevant SAO Structures
After extraction of SAO structures, SAO structures irrelevant to aService job mapshould
be ﬁltered out from the set. Since job-to-be-done are basically related to SAO structures for
customer actions, SAO structures having no people/person as the subject can be considered
irrelevant ones. For this, tokens referring to users as “I” and “we” were identiﬁed, and
then they were replaced by token “user”. Therefore, SAO structures having no token “user”
in the subject were ﬁltered out from the set. To ﬁlter out SAO structures having no actions,

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 9 of 25
SAO structures whose action is be-verb, such as “am”, “is”, “was” and “were”, are usually
about customer states or emotions.
3.5. Transforming Job-To-Be-Done to Customer Outcomes
After ﬁltering out the irrelevant SAO structures, we represented the action in a single
token to cluster similar actions. The original form of ROOT token can be used as the repre-
sentative one. Verbs, such as gerund, past particle or passive voice, can all be represented
in the same way. After verb phrases are represented in a single token, SAO structures are
clustered by the pre-trained BERT-based semantic sentence similarities.
The verb-object (VO) structures in the clustered SAO structures can be considered as
semantically similar job-to-be-done. The VO structures should be transformed into one repre-
sentative customer outcome. The basic structure of outcome is the direction—metric—object
or job-to-be-done, and thus, each SAO structure should be linked with relevant metrics and di-
rections. There exist six types of metrics for service-related outcomes: frequency/possibility,
energy/effort, cost, performance/accuracy/speed, safety, and reliability. Each metric is
related to only one speciﬁc direction (Table 2).
Table 2. Types of metrics and their directions.
Metric Direction
Frequency/possibility Maximize
Energy/effort Minimize
Cost Minimize
Performance/accuracy/speed Maximize
Safety Maximize
Reliability Maximize
To extend VO structures to the form of outcomes, each SAO structure should be linked
with the relevant metrics. We identiﬁed the top two metrics close to the full sentence of the
given SAO structure by using the pre-trained BERT-based semantic similarities. Based on
the pairs of the metrics and VO structures, one representative customer outcome for each
cluster is qualitatively deﬁned.
3.6. Service Opportunity Discovery
ODI framework deﬁnes business/service opportunities as desired outcomes that are
important, but current satisfaction from the existing services is low (Figure 6). Based on this,
ODI calculates the degree of service opportunity based on the gap between the importance
and satisfaction score for the outcome. Speciﬁcally, ODI quantiﬁes the importance and
satisfaction of outcomes on a scale from 0 to 10. The formulation of service opportunities is
as follows:
Service opportunity score (SOS) = Importance + max(Importance − Satis f action, 0 )
This research quantiﬁes the importance and satisfaction of the outcome as follows:
• The importance score can be calculated based on the number of SAO structures–,
i.e., job-to-be-done—in each cluster for the customer outcome; frequently occurred job-
to-be-done are, at least, important issues in a service. However, since the occurrence
frequency distribution is usually skewed and so the size of one or some clusters can
be far larger than the others, the normalization is difﬁcult to transform the scores into
a scale from 0 to 10. Therefore, we utilized k-means clustering, k = 11.
• The satisfaction score is calculated based on the difference between the number of
SAO structures representing positive and negative opinions. The sentiment analysis
for SAO structures was conducted by utilizing a BERT-based sentiment analysis [35].
To use contextual information around SAO structures, the full sentence for each SAO
structure is analyzed. To train BERT for the sentiment analysis of review sentences in

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 10 of 25
a speciﬁc service sector, the training sentences clearly representing negative opinions
were labeled as negative opinions, and the other sentences were labeled as positive
opinions. The range of the satisfaction score also should be on a scale from 0 to 10.
Therefore, we developed the equation as follows: Satis f action = 5 ∗ ((p − n)/T) + 5,
where p is the number of positive SAO structures for a speciﬁc outcome, n is the
number of negative SAO structures for a speciﬁc outcome, T is the total number of
SAO structures for a speciﬁc outcome. The range of (p − n)/T is from -1.0 to 1.0, and
so the range of Satis f action is from 0 to 10.
Figure 6. Outcome-driven innovation (ODI) framework for service opportunity score, redrawn from
Ulwick [5].
4. Empirical Analysis: Hotel Service
This research conducted an empirical case study for hotel service. The hotel service, as
one of the services with the longest history, has established service processes and systems
as the basic framework, and so it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd the crucial points for service innovations.
In addition, from the methodological perspective, customer review data related to hotel
service is relatively easy to collect, and hotel service includes various additional services,
such as facilities, restaurant, and room service and so there are many interactions with cus-
tomers. Therefore, the hotel service is the case that service opportunities can be identiﬁed
from various steps in the Service job-map, and so we deemed hotel service is a suitable case
to be applied to the proposed method. Moreover, since previous studies found that online
review data on hotel service is useful for a business intelligence approach [36,37], the hotel
service can be a good case to test the proposed method.
We collected customer reviews from Trip Advisor (www.tripadvisor.com). Since
reviews with low ratings generally have rich information to ﬁnd customer needs, reviews
rated as one or two points/stars out of ﬁve were only considered as the data set. Three
hundred eighty-ﬁve reviews on Royal Plaza Hotel from 2008 to 2018 were collected in
such conditions. Four thousand six hundred ﬁfty-four sentences were extracted, but
1361 sentences were selected as the ﬁnal data set after cleaning noise sentences; 85% of the

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 11 of 25
sentences were used as the training set, and the rest 15% were used as the test set. Figure 7
shows the occurrence distribution of sentences for each step in Service job map. No sentence
was assigned to step 1: “Contact the service provider and/or access service”. This step is
about customers contacting the hotel for the ﬁrst time, such as a phone call or website visit.
Those actions were not found in customer reviews. Reviewers tend not to mention how
they ﬁrst contacted the hotel. The ﬁrst interaction that reviewers often mention is “booked
room”, which is step 4: “Conﬁrm and/or ﬁnalize service plan”. Since steps 1–3 are done
before they arrive at the hotel, there were little reviews related to the step 1~3.
Figure 7. Sample sentence’s distribution.
To test whether SS-BR performs better than TDNN using BERT, we used BERT with
12 transformer blocks, 768 hidden sizes and 12 self-attention heads and pre-train it with
uncased English vocabulary. The structural difference between TDNN and SS-BR is shown
in Figure 8. In TDNN, the ﬁrst node of the last layer is connected with 13 activation
functions by fully connected layers. Twelve activation functions correspond to 12 steps in
the Service job map, and one activation function is used for sentences that do not belong to
any of the 12 steps. The input to TDNN is a single review sentence, and the output is one
of the labels between 0 and 12, where label 0 denotes noise.
Figure 8. Structural difference between threshold-dependent neural network (TDNN) and semantic
similarity-binary relevance (SS-BR), redrawn from [11].
In SS-BR, the ﬁrst node in the last layer is connected with an activation function. The
input to the SS-BR neural network consists of two sentences where the ﬁrst sentence is a
review sentence, and the second sentence is a semantic sentence that describes each step of
Service job map. Since there are 12 steps, one review sentence must go through 13 different
BERT with a different semantic sentence each time. The range of the output is (0,1), and it
represents the semantic similarity. After calculating all 13 semantic similarities, a review
sentence is assigned to the step with the highest similarity.

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 12 of 25
4.1. Technical Result
Accuracy was calculated under batch sizes 16 and 32, 30 epochs, and 2 × 10−5,
5 × 10−5 and 7 × 10−5 learning rate with the decaying rate of 0.01 on both TDNN and
SS-BR. Since we used a pre-trained BERT model, each run shares an identical initial state.
Training data were fed into the TDNN and SS-BR after being randomly shufﬂed. This
shufﬂing is the only random process, and so we ran 5 different runs and calculated the
average accuracy. Among 30 epochs, the best result is saved, and the trained model is
saved for every 500 steps as a checkpoint. TensorFlow library in Python was used with
Intel i7 3.0 GHz processor and Nvidia GeForce GTX 1080Ti graphic processing unit. Under
these conditions, the result is as follows in Table 3. SS-BR was at least 4.7% point higher
than TDNN and 2.8% point better on average. Based on the result, we concluded that each
step of Service job map is independent, and thus SS-BR outperforms TDNN.
Table 3. Accuracy test of TDNN and SS-BR.
Test Number TDNN (%) SS-BR (%)
T1 73.58 78.05
T2 72.85 79.21
T3 74.16 79.83
T4 73.14 73.29
T5 68.03 74.89
Average 72.35 77.05
By calculating accuracy for every 500 steps, it is learned that the accuracy of SS-BR
converges to its upper bound is less than 2 epochs (Figure 9). The accuracy gets lower as
trained epochs get larger. This means that the training set and SS-BR method reaches the
point where overﬁtting happens very quickly. Overﬁtting is a phenomenon that a neural
network has learned from training sets so excessively that trained parameters in the neural
network can memorize the training sets and shows very accurately while it predicts test
samples in low accuracy. Because the neural network has not already seen the test samples
while training, it cannot predict anything about test samples. To solve this problem, a
neural network must be tested with samples not used for training. As mentioned earlier,
we used 85% of samples for training and 15% for testing them. In general, 50~70% of total
samples are used for training, 15~30% are used for validation, and 15~30% are used for
tests. Validation is a process that human experts examine the output of a neural network
and adjust the neural network structure itself or determines when training should stop to
prevent overﬁtting. In our case study, neural network structure, such as a number of layers
and input vector size, is already determined. In addition, by calculating accuracy for every
500 steps with the test sample, we could point out where the overﬁtting starts to happen.
We tagged syntactic dependencies and part-of-speech (POS) by using spaCy library in
Python. Based on this tagging, meaningful clauses in a sentence can be extracted (Table 4).
From 1299 sentences, we extracted 2100 clauses, and 31 of them were incomplete (Table 5).
Since customer reviews are an informal and grammatically incomplete text, it is difﬁcult
to perfectly extract all clauses in a sentence. Most incomplete cases are caused by the
omission of the subject. Reviewers sometimes omit subject, usually “I”, when the context
shows that the subject of a sentence or clause is clearly the reviewer. Since the proportion
of incomplete clauses is very low, less than 2.6%, we did not focus on this issue and deleted
them from the data set.

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 13 of 25
Figure 9. Accuracy of four tests for 500 training steps.
Table 4. Clause examples parsed from review sentences.
No. Clause
1 The ﬁrst few emails returned,
2 they offer me to upgrade to a Grand Plus
3 Speechless but it seems that
4 RPH wants everyone to upgrade to the best package
5 and all it is, is the same room with a different bed.
6 Couple of weeks later, I realize the hotel rate is lower
7 which was about HKD7000++
8 (I couldn’t remember the exact rate)
9 which I ﬁnd it acceptable,
10 although I’m paying a premium
11 the spread is still acceptable.
12 On 28 Sep I logon to the website again
13 and discovered that
14 the rate was much lower at HKD6968.50
15 where I was surprised.
16 No disclosure of any of this maintenance was given at time of booking or on arrival.
17 This information was not provided when
18 I made my reservation through Hotel Club 2 months ago.
19 Having checked the hotel website prior to booking,
20 which advertised
21 the deluxe room came with a king size bed or twin queen sized beds,
22 we tried to check prices on the website
23 but could only ﬁnd prices for a king bed room.
24 We therefore assumed that
25 the prices for these rooms would be the same,
26 as all hotels in the UK for twin and double rooms are the same price.
27 We double checked the hotel’s website-
28 whilst we could ﬁnd a rate for a king size room,
29 nowhere could we ﬁnd a rate for a twin room.
30 Nowhere on the website was it mentioned that
31 the rate for a twin was different from a king size room.
32 The lack of transparency of pricing, and lack of helpfulness at the reception desk left us feeling
33 we were being conned especially
34 as other hotels in Hong Kong charge the same price for a twin/king bed room.
35 I had a bad experience
36 when I had already book a family (plan to travel march 2013)
37 indicated for 4 adults
38 and it mentioned under notes below (in terms and condition)
39 that is free for 2 children under 12 years old
40 when using existing bed.

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 14 of 25
Table 5. Examples of incomplete clauses.
No. Clause
1 Se swapped to British pounds
2 Hint get an express checkout
3 One downside, no cocktails in club lounge even though advertised as such
4 Security check at lift lobby during evening
5 in order to get another room.
6 Despite the long wait at the reception area when checking in,
7 Despite having the do not disturb light on
8 When asking to assist in contacting our travel agent.
9 and despite the late hour still had to wait nearly 20 min for check-in and a key.
10 and still not being informed on another room.
11 To our utter dismay and horror on our arrival home
12 Especially on the last day of stay
13 Ensure you check all the charges on your bill
14 Just nom nom with your money
15 post checking out and paying for our stay
16 Only after checking the CCTV
17 made a compliant to the front desk
18 had to wait until the following day and moved into a much better couple of rooms
19 After being told that
20 Was not sure what caused the delay was,
21 Called down to front dest & waited.
22 Requested for a change of room on the ﬁrst day of our visit via the phone
23 Upgraded on arrival to Executive Floor, much nicer rooms and access to Lounge.
24 Check with the hotel concierge for airport express shuttel frequency + location (with a man in suit on 14/10/2014,
approx. 10.45 p.m.)
25 but was given a strange face expression without even answering our question convincingly, and walk away from us
after someone ask for him
26 And then again to be doubted by the staffs if we have a room there.
27 Arrived late a night
28 Waited at the lobby
29 and was able to check in slightly before 3 p.m.
30 Booked a family room with 2 double bed . . .
31 the STATEMET ABOVE REALLY BAD AND MISLEADING.
SAO structure was extracted from each clause. Some clauses whose verb is intransitive
verb only have subject-action structures. Even though subject-action structures are not
typical SAO structures, they are considered valid data set because the purpose of this
research is to identify customers’ actions. Next, we ﬁltered out irrelevant SAO structures
that do not include customer actions. As a result, 1057 SAO structures were retained after
ﬁltering out. To identify and cluster similar SAO structures, Actions are considered as
a single token. SAO structures are clustered by semantic sentence similarities using the
previously trained BERT. In addition, at the same time, each SAO structure is linked with
the two most similar metric—direction pairs. To this end, the pre-trained BERT-based
semantic similarity between the full sentence of SAO structures and metrics is conducted,
and then, each AO structure is extended to a customer outcome.
Based on the set of the clustered outcomes, one representative customer outcome is
qualitatively deﬁned. The importance and satisfaction score of each customer outcome is
quantiﬁed by the metrics in Section 3.6. Based on the importance and satisfaction scores,
service opportunity scores (SOS) for customer outcomes are evaluated, and Table A1 shows
the results.

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 15 of 25
4.2. Service Opportunity Analysis
The ODI framework considers the outcomes whose service opportunity scores is larger
than or equal to 10 as customer needs having high service opportunities. Our empirical
analysis found seven customer needs in hotel service. Different customer needs were
discovered from various steps in Service job map . Overall, by counting the number of
outcomes for each step, a large number of outcomes were identiﬁed in step 5 and 10 (Table 6).
Since step 5, usually about check-in process, is the initial phase of service delivery where
what customers have reserved online was checked and delivered, many complaints and
demands from customers happen. In particular, the most important customer needs
(SOS ≥ 14.0) for hotel service innovations were mainly identiﬁed in step 5. About step 10,
the main delivery of hotel service is to sell a room, and so changing the delivered service is
basically difﬁcult. Therefore, it usually takes a long time, or is difﬁcult, to solve the service
quality-related problems. Hence, many customer needs and complaints are identiﬁed in
this step.
Table 6. Occurrence frequency of customer outcomes at each step.
Step # Deﬁnition # of Representative
Outcomes
# of Identiﬁed
Outcomes
2 Deﬁne and/or communicate service needs 4 10
3 Evaluate and/or select service options 5 12
4 Conﬁrm and/or ﬁnalize service plan 6 50
5 Initial service delivery 28 120
6 Fulﬁll customer responsibilities 8 9
7 Receive service 11 19
8 Evaluate and/or monitor service delivery 9 17
9 Adjust service plan and/or its execution 3 3
10 Get questions answered and/or problems
resolved 34 64
11 Conclude service 4 14
12 Pay for service 4 16
In particular, the following results show speciﬁc customer needs for service innova-
tions:
• “Minimize cost (to) check in the hotel early” (CO #17, SOS = 14.0) is theoutcome whose
SOS is the highest in our results but seems to be very common, and every hotel service
provider already knew most customers want this outcome. However, few know how
much relatively important this outcome is. Our results quantitatively show that CO #17
is very important, but its current satisfaction is low. Therefore, the strategic directions
for hotel service innovation should focus on CO #17 to maximize customer values.
To deal with this issue, various service options for early check-in can be developed.
At the same time, other relevant issues for service implementation, e.g., fast room
cleaning after checkout, should be considered.
• The outcome “Maximize safety (to) pay price/deposit” (CO #26, SOS = 14.0) is caused
by negative customer experiences related to online payment. Recent online payment
systems usually assure high reliability for online monetary transactions. However,
given that price, time and memory are the most signiﬁcant factors in traveling, online
payment problems can waste customer time and good memory in the trip. Therefore,
many reviewers mentioned this issue in online reviews. Hotel service providers need
to prepare solutions to minimize risks caused by relevant issues.
• The outcome “Maximize possibility (to) avoid waiting at the lobby for check-in, or
other purposes” (CO #30, SOS = 12.5) is a very common customer need. However, our
result shows customers feel this issue is very important, but most hotel services do
not fulﬁll it.

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 16 of 25
• The outcome “Maximize possibility (to) assign to a preferred room” (CO #96,SOS = 12.0)
is evaluated as one of the important business opportunities. From the relevant reviews,
we found that this outcome is usually related to the two expectations: free room upgrade
and assigning to the right room booked by a customer. If a customer is assigned to an
unexpected room, his/her trip may be ruined. In particular, the smoking issue is one
critical example. Some reviews were about a free upgrade and mentioned that they had
a great memory at the hotel due to the free upgrade service.
• “Maximize possibility (to) avoid billing mistake, due to overcharging, ignored pay-
ment by cash, overcharging tips, etc.” (CO #110, SOS = 12.0) sounds similar to CO#26,
but the difference is that CO#110 is caused at the hotels by internal problems, and
CO#26 is caused by online payment problems. Most employees may not seriously
think about these mistakes. However, the result clearly shows that customers highly
matter this outcome. Therefore, a strict guideline or education program should be
developed to reduce the possibility of internal billing mistakes.
• The outcome “Minimize effort (to) check prices” (CO #5, SOS = 10) is closely related
to hotel searching websites. Based on the dynamic pricing strategies, the price for
the same room can be changed over time. Every customer wants to buy at a lower
cost with a minimum effort. Even though the strategic scope for this outcome is not
directly inside hotel service, hotel service providers should ﬁnd ways to fulﬁll this
outcome. Some creative service options may be a solution to deal with this outcome. To
offer a lower price than booking websites to the registered existing customers can be
one example.
• The outcome “Minimize cost (to) book hotel” (CO #11, SOS = 10.5) is about the basic
customer need in any service. All customers are sensitive to price, so it makes sense
that this outcome gets a relatively high score. Recently, it is inevitable for Hotel service
to compete with a new type of accommodation services, such as Airbnb. Therefore,
according to the results and current social, business, and technology trends, we can
think that the traditional hotel business is forced to be changed, or innovated, for
sustainable competitive advantages. Our results provide some strategic directions for
business innovation in hotel service.
5. Conclusions
This research aims to develop a quantitative method to identify customer needs in a
speciﬁc service sector by analyzing online review data based on the ODI framework using
BERT-based deep learning techniques. The major contribution of the proposed method is
as follows: First, this paper is the ﬁrst attempt to develop a data-driven ODI approach for
service sectors. More speciﬁcally, previous studies using a data-driven ODI approach focus
on identifying product opportunities, and so they are based on Universal job map, which
is the eight-step job map for universal purpose, so not well applicable for service sectors.
However, this paper adopted Service job map instead of Universal job map, and so most of
the analytic processes were redesigned. Second, the performance for matching/classifying
the extracted SAOs to one of Service job map steps is improved by using a BERT-based
attention network. Speciﬁcally, each sentence in review data is assigned into one of the
steps in Service job map using BERT-based multiclass sentence classiﬁcation. Since this
process can directly affect the characteristics of the deﬁned outcomes, this process is critical
for the proposed method because this process can directly affect the characteristics of
the deﬁned outcomes, and this paper, in particular, adopted a more complex job map, i.e.,
Service job map. Third, the proposed method automatically generates the outcome statements
for every step in Service job map. Each job-to-be-done is extended to the form of customer
outcome, and the service opportunity score (SOS) for each outcome is evaluated based on
the importance and satisfaction scores. Generating various but reliable outcomes from
different job map steps with minimizing cost is one of the most important demands in
the ODI framework. Even though previous studies [17,18] could not deal with this issue,
this paper developed the method that fulﬁlls the demand. Fourth, since the proposed

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 17 of 25
method can automatically generate outcome statements, the method can assess potential
opportunities for the outcomes without any expensive interview process. Therefore, this
research is the ﬁrst attempt to identify service opportunities based on a data-driven ODI
approach without an interview process.
To test the proposed method, this paper conducted an empirical analysis of the hotel
service sector. The method found signiﬁcant outcomes to develop further service strategies
in the hotel service sector. In particular, the practical advantages of the proposed method
are to identify unrecognized or hidden customer needs and to quantitatively denote what
outcomes, even though some of the sounds common, should be priorly focused on to
develop customer values. Prior research on analyzing hotel service using online customer
review [38] have calculated keyword frequencies and divided reviews into four groups.
Other studies [39,40] also use keyword frequencies to analyze a large amount of text data.
Considering that “billing mistake” caused the hotel’s internal process problems and online
payment problems, keyword-frequency-based analysis has limitations in identifying such
context. Based on the results, new value propositions should be developed to better fulﬁll
the discovered service opportunities.
However, some issues should be considered in further work. First, the large size of
review data should be secured to improve the quality of results. The proposed method
basically adopts many machine learning, speciﬁcally deep learning, techniques, and so
the size of the training set is one important factor in assuring reliability. Second, even
though a neural network performs better than previous networks, its accuracy is not yet
sufﬁcient to capture all meaningful sentences. In addition, when new customer action is
introduced, and customer reviews on that action are little, neural networks may fail to
classify that action as relevant. Third, this research transforms the clustered outcomes
into one representative outcome based on qualitative knowledge. In fact, there exist some
approaches for automatic sentence inferencing, but our toy-test in sentence inferencing for
this research, or hotel service case, provided an insufﬁcient performance. Even though we
adopted an expert-based representation to increase the quality and reliability, an automatic
sentence representation can provide a huge advantage for this research.
Our further work will focus on neural network structure to perform better with
less training datasets. Neural network techniques, such as transfer learning, are being
considered. By collecting data from various service industries, the neural network could
be trained to classify general jobs, and by further train task-speciﬁc data, the model is
tuned to produce a desirable outcome. To utilize transfer learning, services that share a
common structure for the process must be clustered beforehand, which is also another
future research topic. To overcome the limitation regarding the outcome cluster issue,
GANs (generative adversarial networks)-based sentence generation [ 41] is a carefully
considered possible approach.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.N., N.R. and H.P .; methodology , S.N. and S.Y .; project
administration, H.P .; supervision, H.P .; writing—original draft, S.N. and H.P .; writing—review and
editing, S.N., N.R. and H.P . All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was supported by Hanyang University (Grant number: HY-2019).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study .
Data Availability Statement: Data are not publicly available, though the data may be made available
on request from the corresponding author.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 18 of 25
Appendix A
Table A1. Service opportunity scores of customer outcomes.
Label Step
Outcome Occurrence
Frequency
# of Positive
Outcomes
# of Negative
Outcomes
Importance
Score
Satisfaction
Score
Service
Opportunity
Score (SOS)Direction Metric
(Measure) Job-To-Be-Done
CO(Customer
Outcome)#1 2 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) ask for bed 3 3 0 2 10 2
CO#2 2 Minimize Cost (To) check price on
website 2 0 2 0 0 0
CO#3 2 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) request service 2 2 0 0 10 0
CO#4 2 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) communicate with
the hotel 3 2 1 2 6.66666667 2
CO#5 3 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) check prices 7 0 7 5 0 10 *
CO#6 3 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) logon website 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#7 3 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) make reservation 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#8 3 Maximize Safety (To) remember price 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#9 3 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) pay price 2 1 1 0 5 0
CO#10 4 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) ask for amenities 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#11 4 Minimize Cost (To) book hotel 43 41 2 10 9.53488372 10.46511628 *
CO#12 4 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) give rating 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#13 4 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) communicate with
the hotel 3 3 0 2 10 2
CO#14 4 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) get a room 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#15 4 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) travel in a group 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#16 5 Maximize Performance/
Accuracy/Speed
(To) be assigned to right
rooms 18 11 7 8 6.11111111 9.888888889
CO#17 5 Minimize Cost (To) check in hotel early 30 12 18 9 4 14 *
CO#18 5 Minimize Cost (To) communicate with
the hotel 5 2 3 4 4 4
CO#19 5 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) ask hotel policy 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#20 5 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) ask for sofa 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#21 5 Minimize Cost (To) get extra bed 2 0 2 1 0 2
CO#22 5 Minimize Cost (To) ensure free WIFI 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#23 5 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) explain room
speciﬁcation 2 1 1 1 5 1
CO#24 5 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) send booking notes
to the hotel 1 0 1 0 0 0

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 19 of 25
Table A1. Cont.
Label Step
Outcome Occurrence
Frequency
# of Positive
Outcomes
# of Negative
Outcomes
Importance
Score
Satisfaction
Score
Service
Opportunity
Score (SOS)Direction Metric
(Measure) Job-To-Be-Done
CO#25 5 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) get email
conﬁrmation 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#26 5 Maximize Safety (To) pay price/deposit 12 0 12 7 0 14 *
CO#27 5 Maximize Safety (To) go shopping 4 2 2 3 5 3
CO#28 5 Maximize Performance/
Accuracy/Speed (To) get conﬁrmation 2 0 2 1 0 2
CO#29 5 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) be notiﬁed of
cancellations 2 0 2 1 0 2
CO#30 5 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) avoid waiting at
lobby for check-in (or
other purposes)
13 2 11 7 1.53846154 12.46153846 *
CO#31 5 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) get a prepaid
voucher 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#32 5 Minimize Cost (To) have amenities 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#33 5 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) be notiﬁed of
cancellations 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#34 5 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) get back left/missing
luggage at hotel 3 2 1 2 6.66666667 2
CO#35 5 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) make sure
non-smoking room 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#36 5 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) move to new room 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#37 5 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) print boarding pass 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#38 5 Minimize Energy/Effort
(To) receive reservation
numbers and
conﬁrmation emails
1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#39 5 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) request refreshing of
room next morning 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#40 5 Minimize Cost (To) have enough space 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#41 5 Minimize Cost (To) upgrade room 8 5 3 5 6.25 5
CO#42 5 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) be notiﬁed of room
readiness 4 0 4 3 0 6
CO#43 5 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) sign paperwork 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#44 6 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) access to the room 1 1 0 0 10 0

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 20 of 25
Table A1. Cont.
Label Step
Outcome Occurrence
Frequency
# of Positive
Outcomes
# of Negative
Outcomes
Importance
Score
Satisfaction
Score
Service
Opportunity
Score (SOS)Direction Metric
(Measure) Job-To-Be-Done
CO#45 6 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) carry luggage 2 0 2 1 0 2
CO#46 6 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) get invoice 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#47 6 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) receive access card 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#48 6 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) put do not disturb
card 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#49 6 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) register as guest 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#50 6 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) request cleaning 1 1 1 0 5 0
CO#51 6 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) conﬁrm breakfast at
discount rate 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#52 7 Minimize Cost (To) buy amenities 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#53 7 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) order room service 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#54 7 Minimize Cost
(To) receive executive
lounge service when
upgraded
1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#55 7 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) inquire free shuttle 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#56 7 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) get a room cleaning 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#57 7 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) use coupon 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#58 7 Minimize Cost
(To) pay for service fee
(e.g., Internet, excluded
service, )
6 0 6 4 0 8
CO#59 7 Minimize Cost (To) register at the hotel 2 0 2 1 0 2
CO#60 7 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) sign bill 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#61 7 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) inquire for the
Internet rate 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#62 7 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) communicate to
concierge 3 1 2 2 3.33333333 2
CO#63 8 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) arrive hotel late 2 0 2 1 0 2
CO#64 8 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) change rooms (due
to reasons) 3 0 3 2 0 4
CO#65 8 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) avoid mold 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#66 8 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) avoid signboard
outside 1 0 1 0 0 0

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 21 of 25
Table A1. Cont.
Label Step
Outcome Occurrence
Frequency
# of Positive
Outcomes
# of Negative
Outcomes
Importance
Score
Satisfaction
Score
Service
Opportunity
Score (SOS)Direction Metric
(Measure) Job-To-Be-Done
CO#67 8 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) avoid sewage smell 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#68 8 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) avoid ventilation
system problem 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#69 8 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) avoid insect/bed bug
issue 2 0 2 1 0 2
CO#70 8 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) avoid toilet/shower
issue 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#71 8 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) avoid odor of
cigarette smoke 5 0 5 4 0 8
CO#72 9 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) approach front desk
ofﬁcer 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#73 9 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) check in early 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#74 9 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) request change
rooms 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#75 10 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) accept user’s food in
hotel’s fridge 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#76 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) arrive hotel late 2 1 1 1 5 1
CO#77 10 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) ask for extra towels 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#78 10 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) ask club lounge
member 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#79 10 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) ask to concierge for
direction 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#80 10 Minimize Cost (To) change room 8 1 7 5 1.25 8.75
CO#81 10 Minimize Cost (To) change bedding and
sheets 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#82 10 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) chase missing call 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#83 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) ask to see a doctor 1 1 0 0 10 0
CO#84 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) accept speciﬁc room
service request 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#85 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) book a room 1 0 1 0 0 0

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 22 of 25
Table A1. Cont.
Label Step
Outcome Occurrence
Frequency
# of Positive
Outcomes
# of Negative
Outcomes
Importance
Score
Satisfaction
Score
Service
Opportunity
Score (SOS)Direction Metric
(Measure) Job-To-Be-Done
CO#86 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) connect (properly) to
front desk 8 3 5 5 3.75 6.25
CO#87 10 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) check rooms 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#88 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) check in late 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#89 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) assign to connecting
rooms 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#90 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) avoid from noise 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#91 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) be notiﬁed of
renovations 4 0 4 3 0 6
CO#92 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) assign to
non-smoking room 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#93 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) avoid card key
problem 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#94 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) avoid mold problem 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#95 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) avoid odor of
cigarette smoke 4 0 4 3 0 6
CO#96 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) assign to preferred
room 9 0 9 6 0 12 *
CO#97 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) avoid sewage smell 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#98 10 Minimize Cost (To) pay for another day 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#99 10 Maximize Frequency
/Possibility (To) avoid insect issue 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#100 10 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) request room
refreshing next morning 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#101 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) avoid lift problem 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#102 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) sleep comfortable 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#103 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) avoid mold issue 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#104 10 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) get dehumidiﬁer 1 0 1 0 0 0

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 23 of 25
Table A1. Cont.
Label Step
Outcome Occurrence
Frequency
# of Positive
Outcomes
# of Negative
Outcomes
Importance
Score
Satisfaction
Score
Service
Opportunity
Score (SOS)Direction Metric
(Measure) Job-To-Be-Done
CO#105 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) avoid malfunction of
alarm 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#106 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) assign to
downgraded room 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#107 10 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) check out early 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#108 10 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility (To) avoid odor issue 2 0 2 1 0 2
CO#109 11 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) enquiry to manager 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#110 11 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) avoid billing mistake
(due to overcharging,
ignored payment by cash,
overcharging tips)
9 0 9 6 0 12 *
CO#111 11 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) be notiﬁed for late
check-out 3 0 3 2 0 4
CO#112 11 Minimize Cost (To) pay for early
check-in 1 0 1 0 0 0
CO#113 12 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) get a proper service
at front desk 2 1 1 1 5 1
CO#114 12 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) avoid billing mistake
(due to exchange rate,
calculation mistake, . . . )
6 2 4 4 3.33333333 4.666666667
CO#115 12 Maximize Frequency/
Possibility
(To) return deposit
properly 7 3 4 5 4.28571429 5.714285714
CO#116 12 Minimize Energy/Effort (To) communicate with
manager 1 1 0 0 10 0
* : outcomes having high business opportunities.

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 24 of 25
References
1. Fritsch, M.; Mueller, P . Effects of new business formation on regional development over time. Reg. Stud. 2004, 38, 961–975.
[CrossRef]
2. Aaker, D.A.; Adler, D.A. Developing Business Strategies; John Wiley & Sons: New York, NY, USA, 2001.
3. Mun, C.; Kim, Y.; Yoo, D.; Yoon, S.; Hyun, H.; Raghavan, N.; Park, H. Discovering business diversiﬁcation opportunities using
patent information and open innovation cases. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2019, 139, 144–154. [CrossRef]
4. Park, H.; Yoon, J. A chance discovery-based approach for new product-service system (PSS) concepts. Serv. Bus. 2015, 9, 115–135.
[CrossRef]
5. Ulwick, A. What Customers Want; McGraw-Hill Professional Publishing: New York, NY, USA, 2005.
6. Bigorra, A.M.; Isaksson, O.; Karlberg, M. Semi-autonomous methodology to validate and update customer needs database
through text data analytics. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2020, 52, 102073.
7. Xu, X.; Wang, X.; Li, Y.; Haghighi, M. Business intelligence in online customer textual reviews: Understanding consumer
perceptions and inﬂuential factors. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2017, 37, 673–683. [CrossRef]
8. Ulwick, A.W. What Is Outcome-Driven Innovation® (ODI)? White Paper; Strategyn Inc.: Denver, CO, USA, 2009.
9. Ulwick, A.W. Jobs to Be Done: Theory to Practice; Idea Bite Press: New York, NY, USA, 2016.
10. Christensen, C.M.; Hall, T.; Dillon, K.; Duncan, D.S. Know your customers’ jobs to be done. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2016, 94, 54–62.
11. Devlin, J.; Chang, M.-W.; Lee, K.; Toutanova, K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
arXiv 2018, arXiv:1810.04805.
12. Manning, C.D.; Surdeanu, M.; Bauer, J.; Finkel, J.R.; Bethard, S.; McClosky, D.The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language Processing
Toolkit, Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, Baltimore, MD,
USA, 22–27 June 2014; Association for Computational Linguistics: Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2014; pp. 55–60.
13. Honnibal, M.; Montani, I. spaCy 2: Natural language understanding with bloom embeddings, convolutional neural networks
and incremental parsing. To Appear 2017, 7.
14. Christensen, C.M.; Anthony, S.D.; Berstell, G.; Nitterhouse, D.J.M.S.M.R. Finding the right job for your product. MIT Sloan Manag.
Rev. 2007, 48, 38.
15. Johnson, M.W.; Christensen, C.M.; Kagermann, H. Reinventing your business model. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2008, 86, 57–68.
16. Bettencourt, L. Service Innovation: How to go from Customer Needs to Breakthrough Services; McGraw Hill Professional: New York,
NY, USA, 2010.
17. Lim, J.; Choi, S.; Lim, C.; Kim, K. SAO-based semantic mining of patents for semi-automatic construction of a customer job map.
Sustainability 2017, 9, 1386. [CrossRef]
18. Joung, J.; Jung, K.; Ko, S.; Kim, K. Customer complaints analysis using text mining and outcome-driven innovation method for
market-oriented product development. Sustainability 2019, 11, 40. [CrossRef]
19. Mikolov, T.; Chen, K.; Corrado, G.; Dean, J.J. Efﬁcient estimation of word representations in vector space. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations, Scottsdale, AZ, USA, 2–4 May 2013.
20. Park, H.; Yoon, J.; Kim, K. Identifying patent infringement using SAO based semantic technological similarities. Scientometrics
2012, 90, 515–529. [CrossRef]
21. Elman, J. Finding structure in time. Cogn. Sci. 1990, 14, 179–211. [CrossRef]
22. Hochreiter, S. The vanishing gradient problem during learning recurrent neural nets and problem solutions. Int. J. Uncertain.
Fuzziness Knowl. Based Syst. 1998, 6, 107–116. [CrossRef]
23. Pennington, J.; Socher, R.; Manning, C. Glove: Global Vectors for Word Representation, Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Doha, Qatar, 25–29 October 2014; Association for Computational Linguistics:
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2014; pp. 1532–1543.
24. Bojanowski, P .; Grave, E.; Joulin, A.; Mikolov, T.J.T. Enriching word vectors with subword information.Trans. Assoc. Comput.
Linguist. 2017, 5, 135–146. [CrossRef]
25. LeCun, Y.A.; Bottou, L.; Orr, G.B.; Müller, K.-R. Efﬁcient backprop. InNeural networks: Tricks of the Trade; Springer Link: Berlin,
Germany, 2012; pp. 9–48.
26. Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A.N.; Kaiser, Ł.; Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Proceedings of The Thirty-First Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, Long Beach, CA, USA, 4–9 December 2017; Biosonomy: Kassel, Germany, 2017; pp. 5998–6008.
27. Read, J.; Pfahringer, B.; Holmes, G.; Frank, E. Classiﬁer chains for multi-label classiﬁcation. J. Mach. Learn. 2011, 85, 333.
[CrossRef]
28. Zhang, M.-L.; Zhou, Z.-H.J.G. A k-nearest neighbor based algorithm for multi-label classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2005
IEEE International Conference on Granular Computing, Beijing, China, 25–27 July 2005; Volume 5, pp. 718–721.
29. Luaces, O.; Díez, J.; Barranquero, J.; del Coz, J.J.; Bahamonde, A. Binary relevance efﬁcacy for multilabel classiﬁcation. Prog. Artif.
Intell. 2012, 1, 303–313. [CrossRef]
30. Nam, J.; Kim, J.; Mencía, E.L.; Gurevych, I.; Fürnkranz, J. Large-Scale Multi-Label Text Classiﬁcation—Revisiting Neural Networks,
Proceedings of the Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Nancy, France, 14–18 September
2014; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2014; pp. 437–452.
31. Rifkin, R.; Klautau, A. In defense of one-vs-all classiﬁcation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2004, 5, 101–141.

===PAGE BREAK===

Sustainability 2021, 13, 391 25 of 25
32. Park, H.; Yoon, J.; Kim, K. Using function-based patent analysis to identify potential application areas of technology for technology
transfer. Exp. Syst. Appl. 2013, 40, 5260–5265. [CrossRef]
33. Park, H.; Ree, J.J.; Kim, K. Identiﬁcation of promising patents for technology transfers using TRIZ evolution trends. Exp. Syst.
Appl. 2013, 40, 736–743. [CrossRef]
34. Park, H.; Yoon, J.; Kim, K. Identiﬁcation and evaluation of corporations for merger and acquisition strategies using patent
information and text mining. Scientometrics 2013, 97, 883–909. [CrossRef]
35. Sun, C.; Qiu, X.; Xu, Y.; Huang, X. How to Fine-Tune BERT for Text Classiﬁcation? Proceedings of the China National Conference on
Chinese Computational Linguistics, Kunming, China, 18–20 October 2019; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2019; pp. 194–206. [CrossRef]
36. Hu, Y.-H.; Chen, K. Predicting hotel review helpfulness: The impact of review visibility, and interaction between hotel stars and
review ratings. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2016, 36, 929–944. [CrossRef]
37. Neirotti, P .; Raguseo, E.; Paolucci, E. Are customers’ reviews creating value in the hospitality industry? Exploring the moderating
effects of market positioning. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2016, 36, 1133–1143. [CrossRef]
38. Ban, H.-J.; Choi, H.; Choi, E.-K.; Lee, S.; Kim, H.-S. Investigating key attributes in experience and satisfaction of hotel customer
using online review data. Sustainability 2019, 11, 6570. [CrossRef]
39. Kim, N.; Lee, S.; Jo, S.; Kim, J. Multi-dimensional keyword search and analysis of hotel review data using multi-dimensional text
cubes. J. Inf. Technol. Archit. 2014, 11, 63–73.
40. Hwang, S.-Y.; Lai, C.-Y.; Jiang, J.-J.; Chang, S. The identiﬁcation of noteworthy hotel reviews for hotel management. Pac. Asia J.
Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2014, 6, 1. [CrossRef]
41. Yuan, C.; Huang, Y.-C. Personalized sentence generation using generative adversarial networks with author-speciﬁc word usage.
arXiv 2019, arXiv:1904.09442. [CrossRef]